Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders (2019) 49:3866–3876 
reported in two case studies (Sandler et al. 2000; Rodakis 
2015). However, high use of different antibiotics in children 
who subsequently developed autism was shown in a num-
ber of observational studies (Fallon 2005; Niehus and Lord 
2006; Bittker and Bell 2018). Hypothetically, these observed 
effects could be attributable to microbiota alterations, trig-
gering a disturbed immune response and the release of 
cytokines, thus, affecting the function of the central nerv-
ous system (de Theije et al. 2011). Recently, a number of 
observational studies have assessed a possible association of 
early-life antibiotic exposure and subsequent development 
of ASD. Here we aimed to systematically document avail-
able evidence on the association between early life antibiotic 
exposure and the prevalence of ASD later in in childhood.
Methods
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria for the Review
Cohort studies, case–control studies, and cross-sectional 
studies  were  eligible  for  inclusion  in  this  review.  The 
included  studies  needed  to  investigate  an  association 
between pre- and/or postnatal antibiotic exposure and sub-
sequent diagnosis of ASD. We included studies in which 
women during any trimester of pregnancy or infants and/
or children underwent antibiotic treatment. We focused on 
early-life antibiotic exposure that preceded a diagnosis of 
ASD, which is usually established after the second year of 
life (Mandell et al. 2005). Studies on antibiotic exposure in 
breastfeeding mothers and subsequent risk of ASD in their 
children were not included. Since the hypothesized link 
between ASD and antibiotic use is based on the aforemen-
tioned microbiome-gut-brain axis mechanism, only stud-
ies which reported data on systemic and/or oral antibiotic 
therapy were taken into an account. Any antibiotic types 
and doses, as well as any treatment durations and indica-
tions were admissible, as long as the therapy fulfilled the 
aforementioned criteria. Studies that reported data on anti-
biotic use collectively (e.g., along with other medications) 
or that did not report numerical data were excluded. Studies 
in which the data on antibiotic use was collected only for the 
purpose of baseline characteristic of participants, with no 
analysis of the association between antibiotic use and ASD 
were also excluded.
Our outcome of interest was the diagnosis of ASD during 
childhood. Studies in which the diagnosis was made accord-
ing to established criteria, such as those described in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-V 
(American Psychiatric Association 2013), as well as stud-
ies in which ASD was reported by parents, caregivers or 
doctors without any described specific criteria, were avail-
able for inclusion. Studies that reported data on ASD only 
collectively with other neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., 
together with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder), were 
excluded. Only studies that compared children with ASD up 
to 18 years of age to generally healthy children without this 
diagnosis were included.
Search Methods
A systematic literature search was performed on 28th of 
August 2018, with no language or publication date restric-
tions. The databases searched were PubMed, Embase, and 
PsycINFO. After drafting the first version of the manuscript, 
we ran a search update on the 11th of December 2018. The 
full search strategies for PubMed and Embase are presented 
in Online Resource 1. Additionally, reference lists of identi-
fied observational studies and relevant review articles were 
manually screened.
Study Selection
Three authors/reviewers (AH, BPG, JŁ) independently 
screened the title of each study identified with the search 
strategy as well as the abstracts of potentially relevant arti-
cles. Subsequently, the full text for each study potentially 
relevant after abstract screening, as well as that for studies of 
unclear relevance, was retrieved. Each author independently 
assessed the eligibility of the articles and, in cases of a disa-
greement, resolved differences by discussion.
Data Extraction and Risk of Bias Assessment
Data were extracted with the use of a standard data extrac-
tion form. The extracted data included study year, country, 
design, population, definition of exposure, definitions of 
cases and controls (for case–control studies), definition of 
outcome (for cohort studies), results, confounding factors, 
and data collection methods. We extracted and reported all 
the data using the same terminology as the authors of the 
original articles.
Risk of bias was assessed using the Newcastle–Ottawa 
Scale (NOS) (Wells et al. 2011), in which the reviewers 
assign stars in all predefined bias domains. In the com-
parability domain the reviewers have to assign 0, 1, or 2 
stars on the basis of the number and types of confounding 
factors controlled for. Multiple important confounding fac-
tors may play a role in studies on the antibiotic-ASD asso-
ciation, including those related to different demographics, 
pregnancy-related complications, mothers’ obstetrical histo-
ries, child characteristics at birth, infections, environmental 
exposures, and healthcare use (Lyall et al. 2017). The NOS 
requires the reviewers to assign stars depending on two cho-
sen, most important factors. After the literature search and 
discussion, we found no rationale to decide whether any of 
3867
