The number of children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been
increasing. Previous studies suggested potential association between pregnancy air pollution exposure
and ASD. This systematic review and meta-analysis is intended to summarize the association between
maternal exposure to outdoor air pollution and ASD in children by trimester based on recent studies.
Methods: A systematic literature search in 3 databases (Medline, Embase, and Web of Science) was
performed using subject headings related to ASD and air pollution since 2007. Eligible studies were
screened and evaluated based on predetermined criteria. For meta-analyses, the studies were grouped by

air pollutant and exposure time (prenatal period and trimesters). Within-group studies were stan-
dardized by log odds ratio (OR) and then combined by three meta-analysis methods: frequentist fixed

and random effects models, and Bayesian random effects model.

Results: Initial search identified 1564 papers, of which 25 studies remained for final analysis after du-
plicates and ineligible studies were removed. Of the 25 studies, 13, 14, 12, and 7 studies investigated ASD

in children associated with PM2.5, PM10, NO2, and ozone, respectively. The frequentist and Bayesian

random effects models resulted in different statistical significance. For prenatal period, frequentist meta-
analysis returned significant pooled ORs with 95% confidence intervals, 1.06(1.01,1.11) for PM2.5 and

1.02(1.01,1.04) for NO2, whereas Bayesian meta-analysis showed similar ORs with wider 95% posterior
intervals, 1.06(1.00,1.13) for PM2.5 and 1.02(1.00,1.05) for NO2. Third trimester appeared to have higher
pooled ORs for PM2.5, PM10, and ozone, but patterns in the time-varying associations over the trimester
were inconsistent.
Conclusions: For positive association between maternal exposure to ambient air pollution and ASD in
children, there is some evidence for PM2.5, weak evidence for NO2 and little evidence for PM10 and ozone.
However, patterns in associations over trimesters were inconsistent among studies and among air
pollutants.
Despite the widely-known effects of air pollution, pollutants exposure surrounding pregnancy and the
risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in newborns remains controversial. The purpose of our study
was to carry out a systematic review and meta-analyses of the risk of ASD in newborns following air
pollution exposure during the perinatal period (preconception to second year of life). The PubMed,
Cochrane Library, Embase and ScienceDirect databases were searched for articles, published up to July
2020, with the keywords “air pollution” and “autism”. Three models were used for each meta-analysis: a
global model based on all risks listed in included articles, a pessimistic model based on less favorable
data only, and an optimistic model based on the most favorable data only. 28 studies corresponding to a
total of 758 997 newborns were included (47190 ASD and 703980 controls). Maternal exposure to all
pollutants was associated with an increased risk of ASD in newborns by 3.9% using the global model and
by 12.3% using the optimistic model, while the pessimistic model found no change. Each increase of 5 mg/
m3 in particulate matter <2.5 mm (PM2.5) was associated with an increased risk of ASD in newborns,
regardless of the model used (global þ7%, pessimistic þ5%, optimistic þ15%). This risk increased during
preconception (global þ17%), during pregnancy (global þ5%, and optimistic þ16%), and during the
postnatal period (global þ11% and optimistic þ16%). Evidence levels were poor for other pollutants
(PM10, NOx, O3, metals, solvents, styrene, PAHs, pesticides). PM2.5 was associated with a greater risk
than PM10 (coefficient 0.20, 95CI 0.02 to 0.42), NOx (0.29, 0.08 to 0.50) or solvents (0.24, 0.04 to 0.44).
All models revealed that exposure to pollutants, notably PM2.5 during pregnancy, was associated with an
increased risk of ASD in newborns. Pregnancy and postnatal periods seem to be the most at-risk periods.

Background: Various techniques in assisted reproductive technology (ART) have been developed as solutions for
specific infertility problems. It is important to gain consensual conclusions on the actual risks of
neurodevelopmental disorders among children who are born from ART. This study aimed to quantify the relative
risks of cerebral palsy, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and behavioral problems in children
from different ART methods by using systematic review and meta-analysis. Healthcare providers could use the
results of this study to suggest the suitable ART technique and plan optimum postnatal care.
Methods: Pubmed, Google Scholar, and Scopus databases were used to search for studies up to January 2020. Of
the 181 screened full manuscripts, 17 studies (9.39%) fulfilled the selection criteria. Based on the Newcastle-Ottawa
scale ratings, 7 studies were excluded, resulting in 10 studies that were eventually included in the meta-analyses.
Mantel-Haenszel risk ratio model was used in the meta-analysis, and the results are described using forest plot with
95% confidence interval. Heterogeneity was assessed using the I
2 value.

Results: Pooled evaluation of 10 studies showed that the risk of cerebral palsy in children from assisted
reproductive technology (ART) is higher than children from natural conceptions (risk ratio [RR] 1.82, [1.41, 2.34];
P = 0.00001). Risk of intellectual disability (RR 1.46, [1.03, 2.08]; P = 0.03) and ASD (RR 1.49 [1.05, 2.11]; P = 0.03) are
higher in intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) children compared to conventional in vitro fertilization (IVF)
children. The differences in the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in children born after frozen and fresh embryo
transfers are not significant. Analysis on potential cofounder effects, including multiple birth, preterm birth, and low
birth body weight highlight possibilities of significant correlation to the risks of neurodevelopmental disorders.
(Continued on next page)

Genetic and environmental factors have been recognized to play an important

role in autism. The possibility that exposure to outdoor air pollution increases the risk of autism spec-
trum disorder (ASD) has been an emerging area of research. Herein, we present a systematic review, and

meta-analysis of published epidemiological studies that have investigated these associations.
Methods: We undertook a comprehensive search strategy to identify studies that investigated outdoor

air pollution and autism in children. Overall, seven cohorts and five case-control studies met our in-
clusion criteria for the meta-analysis. We summarized the associations between exposure to air pollution

and ASD based on the following critical exposure windows: (i) first, second and third trimester of
pregnancy, (ii) entire pregnancy, and (iii) postnatal period. Random effects meta-analysis modeling was
undertaken to derive pooled risk estimates for these exposures across the studies.
Results: The meta-estimates for the change in ASD associated with a 10 μg/m3 increase in exposure in
PM2.5 and 10 ppb increase in NO2 during pregnancy were 1.34 (95% CI:0.83, 2.17) and 1.05 (95% CI:0.99,
1.11), respectively. Stronger associations were observed for exposures received after birth, but these
estimates were unstable as they were based on only two studies. O3 exposure was weakly associated

with ASD during the third trimester of pregnancy and during the entire pregnancy, however, these es-
timates were also based on only two studies.

Conclusion: Our meta-analysis support the hypothesis that exposure to ambient air pollution is asso-
ciated with an increased risk of autism. Our findings should be interpreted cautiously due to relatively

small number of studies, and several studies were unable to control for other key risk factors.

Many studies have found associations between early life air pollution exposure and subsequent onset
of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, characteristics that affect susceptibility remain unclear.
Objective: This systematic review examined epidemiologic studies on the modifying roles of social, child, genetic
and maternal characteristics in associations between prenatal and early postnatal air pollution exposure and
ASD.
Methods: A systematic literature search in PubMed and Embase was conducted. Studies that examined modifiers
of the association between air pollution and ASD were included.

Results: A total of 19 publications examined modifiers of the associations between early life air pollution ex-
posures and ASD. In general, estimates of effects on risk of ASD in boys were larger than in girls (based on 11

studies). Results from studies of effects of family education (2 studies) and neighborhood deprivation (2 studies)
on air pollution-ASD associations were inconsistent. Limited data (1 study) suggest pregnant women with
insufficient folic acid intake might be more susceptible to ambient particulate matter less than 2.5 μm (PM2.5)
and 10 μm (PM10) in aerodynamic diameter, and to nitrogen dioxide (NO2). Children of mothers with gestational
diabetes had increased risk of ozone-associated ASD (1 study). Two genetic studies reported that copy number
variations may amplify the effect of ozone, and MET rs1858830 CC genotype may augment effects of PM and
near-roadway pollutants on ASD.
Conclusions: Child’s sex, maternal nutrition or diabetes, socioeconomic factors, and child risk genotypes were
reported to modify the effect of early-life air pollutants on ASD risk in the epidemiologic literature. However, the
sparsity of studies on comparable modifying hypotheses precludes conclusive findings. Further research is
needed to identify susceptible populations and potential targets for preventive intervention.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder that begins in early childhood
and has been associated with several environmental and genetic factors. We aimed to conduct
two-side meta-analyses to determine the association between ASD and pre- and postnatal antibiotic
exposure in childhood. We searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library
for articles published up to February 2019. We evaluated observational studies that assessed the
association between ASD and antibiotic exposure. Of 1459 articles, nine studies were used in the
meta-analysis. We found that early antibiotic exposure, including pre- and postnatal, significantly
increased the ASD risk in children. Furthermore, early antibiotic exposure, including pre- and
postnatal, was significantly increased in children with ASD. Specifically, prenatal antibiotic exposure
was significantly increased in children with ASD; however, postnatal antibiotic exposure was not.
Our results indicate an association between ASD and early antibiotic exposure; specifically, that
prenatal antibiotic exposure is an important risk factor of ASD in children.

We systematically reviewed evidence from observational studies on the associations between autism spectrum disorders

(ASD) and early-life antibiotic exposure. Eleven articles were included in the review. Prenatal antibiotic exposure was associ-
ated with a slightly increased risk of ASD in two cohort studies on overlapping populations and in one case–control study;

in three other case–control studies, no signifcant association was found. One cohort study found a slightly reduced risk of
ASD after postnatal antibiotic exposure, while two other cohort studies on overlapping populations and three case–control
studies reported an increased risk. Meta-analysis of the eligible studies showed no signifcant associations. Current data are
conficting and do not conclusively support the hypothesis that early-life antibiotic exposure is associated with subsequent
ASD development.


