We systematically reviewed evidence from observational studies on the associations between autism spectrum disorders

(ASD) and early-life antibiotic exposure. Eleven articles were included in the review. Prenatal antibiotic exposure was associ-
ated with a slightly increased risk of ASD in two cohort studies on overlapping populations and in one case–control study;

in three other case–control studies, no signifcant association was found. One cohort study found a slightly reduced risk of
ASD after postnatal antibiotic exposure, while two other cohort studies on overlapping populations and three case–control
studies reported an increased risk. Meta-analysis of the eligible studies showed no signifcant associations. Current data are
conficting and do not conclusively support the hypothesis that early-life antibiotic exposure is associated with subsequent
ASD development.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of neurodevelopmental conditions characterized by persistent defcits
in social communication and restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, beginning in the
developmental period  Currently used term ‘ASD’ is an umbrella diagnosis for a group of conditions, namely: autistic disorder,
Asperger syndrome, childhood disintegrative disorder and
pervasive developmental disorder-not otherwise specifed

The World Health Organization estimates
that approximately one in 160 children has ASD . However, according to recent
studies, the current prevalence of ASD in certain communities may fall between 1 and 2% . Moreover, the prevalence of autism has
steadily risen during the last decades . The etiology of ASD is heterogeneous . Multiple genetic factors, a variety of environmental

factors , and a complex interplay between these factors have

been proposed and extensively studied. A recent rise in the
prevalence of ASD suggests a major role of the environment.
Since the symptoms of ASD typically occur during early
childhood, potential causative factors are most likely to act
during the prenatal and early postnatal periods.
One of the investigated risk factors for ASD is exposure
to antibiotics during pregnancy and childhood. It has been

suggested that the intestinal microbiota afects brain function and human behavior, through the so-called microbiome-gut-brain axis . Antibiotics

are one of the factors known to disturb the composition of

the microbiota in infancy . Additionally, a number of studies have confrmed that individuals

with ASD have diferent intestinal microbiome compositions
compared to those of healthy individuals . In regard to potential efects of antibiotics on ASD,
improvement of ASD symptoms after antibiotic use was
reported in two case studies. However, high use of diferent antibiotics in children
who subsequently developed autism was shown in a number of observational studies. Hypothetically, these observed
efects could be attributable to microbiota alterations, triggering a disturbed immune response and the release of
cytokines, thus, afecting the function of the central nervous system . Recently, a number of observational studies have assessed a possible association of
early-life antibiotic exposure and subsequent development
of ASD. Here we aimed to systematically document available evidence on the association between early life antibiotic

exposure and the prevalence of ASD later in in childhood.
Cohort studies, case–control studies, and cross-sectional
studies were eligible for inclusion in this review. The
included studies needed to investigate an association

between pre- and/or postnatal antibiotic exposure and subsequent diagnosis of ASD. We included studies in which

women during any trimester of pregnancy or infants and/
or children underwent antibiotic treatment. We focused on
early-life antibiotic exposure that preceded a diagnosis of
ASD, which is usually established after the second year of
life (Mandell et al. 2005). Studies on antibiotic exposure in
breastfeeding mothers and subsequent risk of ASD in their
children were not included. Since the hypothesized link

between ASD and antibiotic use is based on the aforementioned microbiome-gut-brain axis mechanism, only stud-
ies which reported data on systemic and/or oral antibiotic

therapy were taken into an account. Any antibiotic types

and doses, as well as any treatment durations and indications were admissible, as long as the therapy fulflled the

aforementioned criteria. Studies that reported data on antibiotic use collectively (e.g., along with other medications)

or that did not report numerical data were excluded. Studies
in which the data on antibiotic use was collected only for the
purpose of baseline characteristic of participants, with no
analysis of the association between antibiotic use and ASD
were also excluded.
Our outcome of interest was the diagnosis of ASD during

childhood. Studies in which the diagnosis was made according to established criteria, such as those described in the

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-V
 as well as studies in which ASD was reported by parents, caregivers or

doctors without any described specifc criteria, were available for inclusion. Studies that reported data on ASD only
collectively with other neurodevelopmental disorders , were
excluded. Only studies that compared children with ASD up
to 18 years of age to generally healthy children without this
diagnosis were included.
A systematic literature search was performed on 28th of

August 2018, with no language or publication date restrictions. The databases searched were PubMed, Embase, and

PsycINFO. After drafting the frst version of the manuscript,
we ran a search update on the 11th of December 2018. The
full search strategies for PubMed and Embase are presented

in Online Resource 1. Additionally, reference lists of identifed observational studies and relevant review articles were
manually screened.
Three authors/reviewers  independently
screened the title of each study identifed with the search

strategy as well as the abstracts of potentially relevant articles. Subsequently, the full text for each study potentially

relevant after abstract screening, as well as that for studies of
unclear relevance, was retrieved. Each author independently

assessed the eligibility of the articles and, in cases of a disagreement, resolved diferences by discussion.
Data were extracted with the use of a standard data extraction form. The extracted data included study year, country,

design, population, defnition of exposure, defnitions of
cases and controls, defnition of
outcome, results, confounding factors,
and data collection methods. We extracted and reported all
the data using the same terminology as the authors of the
original articles.
Risk of bias was assessed using the Newcastle–Ottawa
Scale, in which the reviewers assign stars in all predefned bias domains. In the com-
parability domain the reviewers have to assign 0, 1, or 2

stars on the basis of the number and types of confounding

factors controlled for. Multiple important confounding factors may play a role in studies on the antibiotic-ASD asso-
ciation, including those related to diferent demographics,

pregnancy-related complications, mothers’ obstetrical histories, child characteristics at birth, infections, environmental

exposures, and healthcare use (Lyall et al. 2017). The NOS

requires the reviewers to assign stars depending on two chosen, most important factors. After the literature search and

discussion, we found no rationale to decide whether any of
the above-mentioned factors was more important than the

others. Therefore, we decided to assign zero stars to studies in which no confounding factors were controlled for or

the adjustment was unclear, and two stars to studies which
controlled for any confounding factors. Additionally, for
informative purposes, we present confounders identifed in
each study in a separate table. We decided to present risk
of bias only descriptively and no collective score for the
included studies was counted.A meta-analysis of the fndings was performed if at least two
studies of the same type reported the
adjusted odds ratios (aOR) or adjusted hazard ratios (aHR)

of ASD being diagnosed in participants exposed to antibiotics during the same life period (pre- or postnatally). We

performed the meta-analyses using the Review Manager 5.3
software by the Cochrane Collaboration. Generic inverse

variance with the random efects model was used. Additionally, the fxed efects model was applied to see how it would

infuence the results. To enable a graphic presentation of the

fndings in studies which didn’t report OR or HR, we calculated crude ORs/HRs and 95% confdence intervals (95% CI)

of ASD being diagnosed after antibiotic exposure, provided
the data were sufcient.In total, we identifed 6820 records by the database search
and 891 records by reference screening. After exclusion
of duplicates and title and abstract screening, the full

texts of 63 articles were assessed for eligibility. Thirty-
seven observational studies on risk factors for autism were

excluded because they did not report antibiotic exposure.
Reasons for exclusion of the remaining 15 studies are
listed in Online Resource 2. After full-text assessment,
11 articles ultimately met the inclusion criteria for this

Online Resources 3 and 4 present characteristics and
main results of the included studies. Four of those studies

were cohort studies, and seven of them were case–control studies. Among the included cohort studies, three

Danish studies were performed in overlapping populations. Five studies examined prenatal antibiotic

exposure, fve assessed early childhood antibiotic exposure
and 1 study examined both types of exposure. In the majority of included studies, use of any
antibiotic, for any indication and duration and at any dose

within the defned time period, was analyzed. Additionally, all of the cohort studies and two of the case–control

studies included a number of secondary/sensitivity analyses, taking antibiotic type, spectrum, timing, number of

courses, and/or indication into account.
Overall, three out of four included cohort studies earned a
maximum number of stars, and only one study lost one star

in one of the NOS domains. In contrast, all of the case–control studies carried a considerable amount of bias, mostly

concerning case defnitions, control for confounding factors,

and ascertainment of exposure. Details of risk of bias assessment for cohort and case–control studies, respectively, are

presented in Online Resource 5. Additionally, we listed all
the confounding factors used in adjusted analyses in Online

Prenatal Antibiotic Exposure
Cohort Studies
Prenatal antibiotic exposure as a risk factor for autism was
examined in two large Danish cohort studies performed

in overlapping populations. The studies involved, respectively:

was most likely contained within the population of the second, therefore, we didn’t perform a meta-analysis. The frst

study reported a borderline signifcant increase in the risk
of ASD after use of any antibiotics anytime during pregnancy . A stronger association of prenatal
antibiotic exposure with the risk of ASD was reported for
the use of sulfonamides anytime during pregnancy 
trimester. Similar results were observed for infantile autism
(defned as ICD-10 code F84.0 assigned to participant), with
the strongest association reported for the use of macrolides
anytime during the pregnancy .
Confounding factors controlled for in adjusted model were
as follows: gender, maternal age, parity, maternal smoking
during pregnancy, paternal age, parental psychiatric history,
and parents’ educational status.

The second study reported a signifcant, positive asso-
ciation between exposure to any antibiotic anytime during

pregnancy and subsequent risk of autism in the ofspring
. The analysis was adjusted
only for sex and age. Assessment of this association was not
a primary focus of the study, and it was only reported as a
secondary analysis in the supplementary materials.
Case–Control Studies
Four of the included case–control studies examined risk of
ASD after prenatal antibiotic exposure. Among them, two
clinic-based studies ,
were available for a meta-analysis. They were conducted in
groups of children of 343, respectively. None of those studies found sig-
nifcant associations between antibiotic use and ASD, with

while the second study controlled for a number of
perinatal, gestational, and socioeconomic variables

In one study conducted in 288 Polish children including 96 with autism , the results

were presented as the percent of cases versus percent of controls exposed to prenatal antibiotics. The univariate model

revealed signifcantly higher exposure to antibiotics in the
autism group 
 However, for undescribed reasons, the antibiotics were analyzed only collectively with other medications in the multivariate model.

The last study was performed in 415 Swedish children,

including 206 with ASD . In the sta-
tistical model, autism was regressed on antibiotic use during pregnancy. The data were presented as logistic regression betas in the form of log odds and

were reported by the authors as not statistically signifcant.
None of the aforementioned case control studies investigated type of antibiotic, duration of antibiotic therapy, or its

timing during pregnancy.
Early childhood antibiotic exposure as a risk factor for
autism was examined in three cohort studies. One study
performed in 214,834 Canadian children, including 2965
with ASD (Hamad et al. 2018), reported a trend towards a

reduced risk of ASD in children exposed to any antibiotics during the frst year of life after adjusting for relevant
demographic, prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal factors . Stratifying the analysis by sex and
region resulted in a statistically signifcant association in males and in children from
urban regions . In secondary analyses, a borderline signifcance was found for the association of specifc antibiotic groups with ASD, namely peni-
cillin ) and macrolides. The number of antibiotic courses
and duration of therapy were not associated with ASD risk.

In additional analysis of sibling-controlled design, antibiotics use was not associated with risk of developing ASD.
Two other cohort studies were nation-wide, registerbased studies of the Danish population. Both of these studies derived data from the same registers and covered similar

time periods, so their populations largely overlapped. In
one study in 677,403 children, including 8267 with autism
, a slightly increased risk of autism
was observed in children exposed postnatally to penicillin

 as well as to broader-spectrum antibiotics compared

to children unexposed to antibiotics in the standard model.
However, a signifcant association was no longer observed
in the between-within sibling model . In another
study performed in 780,547 children including 9352 with
autism (Wimberley et al. 2018), the risk of autism increased
after broad-spectrum antibiotic exposure before the age of
5. Moreover, risk of autism

was higher after exposure to broad-spectrum and moderate spectrum antibiotics anytime during childhood . Both of these studies controlled for a range
of potential confounders, including diferent demographic,
pregnancy and neonatal factors, parental psychiatric history,
and parity.
Since at least two studies of the same type reported the
aHR of ASD after antibiotic exposure, a meta-analysis was
feasible. However, the two Danish studies were performed in
highly overlapping populations, so pooling of their data was
not justifable. To perform a meta-analysis, we used the data
from the 1 of the 2 Danish studies, in which the exposure
and its timing were consistent with those in the Canadian
study. Pooling of the data did not yield
any signifcant association between antibiotic exposure and
subsequent diagnosis of ASD, either in the standard model
 or in the sibling model. Three case–control studies examined association between
ASD and childhood antibiotic exposure. One internet survey-based study performed in 1515 children, which reported the data in
the form of logistic regression OR, found a positive association between the number of antibiotic courses taken during
the frst 2 years of life and subsequent diagnosis of ASD in
all performed analyses, including the fnal multifactor model
. The study controlled for age of the child, ethnicity, maternal education, and region.
Another study performed in a group of 214 children  reported crude ORs of autism in children exposed postnatally to antibiotics compared to unexposed unrelated controls  and unexposed healthy siblings . 
Additionally, a multivariable modeling of data was performed with use of the Auto-CM artifcial neural network a method that does not generate numerical results but
rather provides a map of associations of strength between all variables in the data set. According to the authors’ interpretation, the proximity of ‘early antibiotic use’ to the ‘autism
node’ observed on the map may suggest a signifcant association between the two.
In one case control study involving 99 children, the mean number of

antibiotic courses taken before the age of 2 years was signifcantly higher in the autism/ASD group compared to the
control group . Data provided by the
authors were insufcient to calculate ORs.
None of these case–control studies assessed specifc types
of antibiotics nor the duration of therapy within the analyses.
ORs and HRs of ASD
In this review on pre- and postnatal antibiotic exposure and
subsequent risk of autism/ASD, a total of 11 observational
studies were included. In two identifed cohort studies on

prenatal antibiotic exposure performed in overlapping populations, a slightly increased risk of ASD/infantile autism

after the use of various antibiotics was observed. However, 3 of 4 identifed case–control studies did not report any signifcant association between prenatal antibiotic exposure

and autism risk, whereas one reported a positive association
based only on univariate analysis. Three identifed cohort

studies on early childhood antibiotic exposure reported conficting evidence. In one cohort study, a small trend towards
a reduced risk of ASD in infants exposed to various antibiotics in their frst year of life was observed, which was not

signifcant in secondary analyses based on sibling-controlled
design. In another cohort study, a borderline increased
risk of ASD was observed with exposure to certain types
of antibiotics in a standard model but no association was
observed in a between-within sibling model. Finally, in the
third study on a cohort overlapping with the previous one, a
signifcantly higher risk of autism after exposure to various
classes of antibiotics was observed. Data from case–control
studies on antibiotic exposure during childhood were more
consistent. All three of them reported signifcant, positive
associations between antibiotic use and later ASD diagnosis.
To our knowledge, no previous systematic review has

examined antibiotic use during pregnancy and early childhood as a potential risk factor for ASD. A number of meta analyses have reported data on various infections preced-
ing ASD diagnosis , and some
have found signifcant positive associations with infections
occurring during pregnancy. Additionally, one of those systematic reviews
reported increased risk of ASD after prenatal exposure to
diferent medications, including antibiotics, which were,
however, not assessed separately . In

another meta-analysis, no associations between early post-
natal infections and subsequent risk of ASD were found

. On the other hand, some observa-
tional studies have found evidence of a higher risk of mental

disorders after various infections in older children and in
adults . Recently,
more scientifc attention is being drawn towards efects of
early-life antibiotic exposure on long-term health outcomes,
including reports of its negative infuence on neurocognitive
development 
The main strength of this review is its novelty, as no
previous systematic review has focused on the association
between early-life antibiotic exposure and ASD. Our study

utilized a broad search strategy, complemented by an extensive reference hand search, so the possibility of missing

important published data is low. A relatively narrow clinical question allowed us to focus in detail on the included

studies and enabled a clear and meticulous presentation of

fndings. However, this review also has considerable limitations. Compared to the number of other potential environ-
mental risk factors for ASD, antibiotic exposure turned out

to be rarely assessed Thus, only 11 studies were fnally included in the
review, the majority of which were of case–control design.

After division into groups depending on study type and timing of exposure, small groups of 2 to 4 studies were created.

Methods of data reporting in these studies were heterogeneous, further limiting the capacity to perform either qualita-
tive or quantitative synthesis of the data. Moreover, each

of the included case–control studies was characterized by a
signifcant potential risk of bias. Another limitation of this
study is the inclusion of only published data, creating a risk
of publication bias. Finally, we excluded a number of studies
in which infections were explored as potential risk factors
for ASD. Some types of these infections are almost always

treated with antibiotics , so we could

have assumed them to be a proxy for antibiotic exposure.
However, we decided to use only direct data on exposure.
Results of the included studies do not provide conclusive
evidence to support the hypothesis that prenatal antibiotic
exposure is associated with ASD. Although a number of

positive associations was reported in two large cohorts, their populations were largely overlapping, so they cannot be treated as

independent studies for the purpose of this review. Moreover, authors of the study with borderline signifcant results

 emphasize, that within their analysis

they made 106 comparisons with no adjustments for multiple testing, so this borderline signifcant association between

prenatal antibiotic exposure and ASD could have been a
chance fnding. While this study was specifcally designed
to examine prenatal risk factors of autism and tested for a
wide range of potential confounders, the other one focused
on postnatal factors and hardly performed any adjustment
in the prenatal exposure analysis. Because of that, in our
opinion the results of the former study are more meaningful.
On the other hand, all of the case–control studies reported
no association between prenatal antibiotic exposure and
ASD, except for one that reported higher risk of autism in
exposed patients (Mrozek-Budzyn et al. 2013). However,

this study was performed in a relatively small group of children, and strangely, its fnding concerning antibiotic exposure was not explored in a multivariate analysis. Moreover,

compared to the literature an unexpectedly low percentage of women in

the control group (2.1%) was reported to have used antibiot-
ics during pregnancy, which may suggest a bias within the

exposure data.
Results of studies on postnatal antibiotic exposure are
conficting. One cohort study reported a reduced risk of
ASD in children after antibiotic use .
However, since the main model was based only on data from

administrative databases, the authors performed secondary analyses based on a sibling-controlled design. In those

analyses, antibiotic use was not associated with the risk of

developing ASD, hence, the authors concluded that the marginal association observed in the main model was unlikely

to be meaningful. In another cohort study , the between-within sibling design analysis did not
confrm the fndings from the standard design analysis of
higher ASD risk after use of certain types of antibiotics. We
used data from these two studies to perform a meta-analysis,
and its results revealed no signifcant association. The fnal
included cohort study (Wimberley et al. 2018) reported a
positive association between postnatal antibiotic exposure

and autism risk. However, since its population largely overlapped with that of the previous cohort, the two cannot be

treated as independent studies for the purpose of this systematic review. Besides the lack of a sibling analysis in the

latter cohort, the diference in results might have originated
from the diferences in the exposure assessment. The authors
of the latter study defned ‘antibiotic use preceding the diagnosis of autism’ as the antibiotic received before the frst

diagnosis of autism registered in the national healthcare
databases. Median age for the frst autism diagnosis in this
study was 7.1 years, which is much later than both median
age of ASD diagnosis reported in the literature and median
age of frst developmental concerns in ASD .Therefore, even for the subgroup of children
exposed to antibiotics before ffth birthday it is unclear, if the
symptoms of autism were absent before the frst antibiotic
administration. In our opinion, this might have introduced
considerable bias.

All of the remaining case–control studies reported a positive association between postnatal antibiotic exposure and

ASD. All of these studies were characterized by considerable potential sources of bias, including small sample sizes

, self-selection

bias  refecting diferences between those who choose to participate in

a study and those who do not, potentially biased control
group selection ,
and/or lack of verifcation if the ASD diagnosis in the case
group was made by a professional.
Also, in all of these studies, the exposure data were based
on parental reports, so a risk of recall bias ,
especially over-reporting the exposure in ASD groups and
under-reporting in control groups, cannot be ruled out.
Data on specifc antibiotic types and risk of ASD are also
inconsistent. In one study, an increased risk of ASD was

reported after prenatal exposure to sulfonamides, penicillins and macrolides, but not cephalosporins . This is consistent with the evidence that macrolides
induce distinctive changes in the microbiome composition of
children . On the other hand, expected
microbiota alterations after the use of cephalosporins should
be at least as strong as those after use of penicillins, due to
cephalosporins’ broader spectrum  Accordingly, another study reported a stronger association between ASD and both pre- and postnatal exposure

to broad spectrum antibiotics  compared to moderate-spectrum antibiotics . However, no signifcant asso-
ciations were found between autism risk and exposure to

narrow-spectrum antibiotics, including macrolides. In two
other cohort studies, no signifcant associations between
ASD and individual types of antibiotics were described
. Individual anti-
biotic types were analyzed and reported diferently in each

of the studies included in our systematic review; therefore,

a meta-analysis was not possible. According to the available evidence, some patterns of microbiota composition in

individuals with ASD have been identifed, mostly regarding
the abundance of diferent Clostridia and Bacteroidetes species and an altered Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio . Such changes may be induced both by macrolides
and broad-spectrum antibiotics. On
the other hand, microbiota alterations in diferent individuals
might not follow a specifc pattern even after use of the same
antibiotic. Apart from the disturbance

of the microbiome-gut-brain axis, to our knowledge no well documented alternative explanations for the antibiotic-ASD

association have been proposed.
A question concerning all of the included studies is the
difculty in diferentiating whether the observed efects
were due to the antibiotics themselves or were due to the
antibiotics acting as a proxy or mediator of an underlying
infection. Only two of the included studies controlled for
infections occurring during the same period as antibiotic
exposure . Noneof the included studies investigated diferences in risk of

autism resulting from specifc indications for antibiotic ther-
apy. Three included studies reported a higher risk of autism
after maternal respiratory infections (Atladottir et al. 2012;
George et al. 2014), fever episodes and infuenza (Atladottir
et al. 2012), or “infections” in general (Guisso et al. 2018);
two studies found signifcant positive associations between
early childhood otitis media episodes and autism  Such associations
of prenatal and early-life infections with autism have been
documented before ,
and they may also be supported by underlying biological
mechanisms
All of the included studies in which the assessment of
exposure was based on parental reports collected after diagnosis of ASD have the possibility of recall bias. Knowledge

of a variety of potential exposures that are considered as
risk factors for ASD is common among parents of children
with ASD thus, they may tend to analyze the previous medical history of their children more and
report medication use more often than parents of the control
children. This is a similar efect to the one observed after
past claims of the supposed vaccination-autism association
 This may suggest a greater reliability
of antibiotic exposure data collected prospectively or derived
from medical records.
Yet another problem in the interpretation of possible
antibiotic-ASD associations is the fact that, despite stable
antibiotic use in Europe and USA in recent years , the prevalence of ASD is actually rising in these
regions . Nevertheless, given the heterogeneous etiology of autism, it is difcult to exclude the possibility that reduced antibiotic use is outweighed by other
environmental factors contributing to ASD risk.
Conclusions
Currently available data from observational studies do not conclusively support the hypothesis that prenatal or postnatal exposure to antibiotics as a group is a risk factor for ASD. However, a portion of the results from large cohort studies may suggest a possible trend towards higher
risk of ASD after use of certain types of antibiotics. More studies, most preferably of a prospective cohort design,
controlling adequately for potential confounding factors The Netherlands, Arnoud Verhoef: Sarphati Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Author Contributions HS conceptualized the study and participated in
its design and interpretation of the data; JŁ conceptualized the study, participated in its design,coordination, data collection and interpretation, and drafted the manuscript; BPG participated in the design and
coordination of the study, as well as data collection and interpretation; AH participated in the design of the study and data collection; RB participated in design of the study. All authors read and approved the fnal manuscript.
Compliance with Ethical Standards Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no confict of interest. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License  which permits unrestricted use, distribu tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Autism spectrum disorder is a complex group of developmental disorders characterized by difficulties in communication
and social interaction and the presence of repetitive body movements or behaviors that can persist throughout life 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
and the Environmental Protection Agency  of the US, recently more children are being diagnosed with ASD. The overall preva-
lence of ASD increased from 1.1% in 2012 to 1.7% in 2014, based on an analysis of medical and school records of 8-year-olds from 11
monitoring sites across the US  Some of the increase in the preva-
lence of ASD may be related to increased monitoring and a broadening of diagnostic criteria  It is unclear whether and to what extent environmental factors
have contributed to the recent increase in ASD. Previous studies suggested that both genetic and environmental factors might play a
role in ASD (Flores-Pajot et al., 2016). One environmental risk factor of interest in the etiology of ASD is exposure to ambient air
pollution. There are six common air pollutants, called criteria pollutants, identified by the US Clean Air Act of 1970: ground-level ozone , lead, particulate matter , carbon monoxide
, nitrogen dioxide , and sulfur dioxide , which are the only air pollutants under national air quality standards.
PM is a complex mixture classified by size into PM2.5  and PM10  that vary by place and time
depending on local industries and infrastructure. Main emission  sources of the others have been known chemical reactions, trans-
portation, and other combustion products . While a few studies in Europe have reported no association
, a number of studies in the US and other countries have reported associations
between maternal exposure to ambient air pollution and ASD in children The different findings may be related to several factors: ASD
ascertainment method, air pollutant and study population. The European studies took into account autistic traits and also examined NOx and PM10 instead of NO2 and PM2.5, or multi countries
which would be more heterogeneous than a single country. Thedifferences between US and Europe could be explained by differences on air pollution levels and sources.
Even though epidemiologic studies found maternal exposure to air pollutants associated with the ASD, the mechanism underlying
this association was not clearly understood. Recent animal experiments with mice found that exposure to unhealthy levels of particulate matter during pregnancy could cause subtle changes in the
structure of the cerebral cortex , as seen in the brains of autistic patients
. A possible mechanism is related to increased neuroinflammation, which leads to decreased expression of the
protein reelindwhich activates a signaling pathway required for proper positioning of neurons in the braindboth events common
with autism . Some studies on human pregnancy have found that prenatal
exposure to air pollution during the developmental stage of the
central nervous system may be linked to a systemic inflammatory
response, which could result in neuronal injury Other studies have also
reported that prenatal exposure to environmental toxicants may be
associated with ASD. However, the relationship between exposure time
and fetal development remains unclear. There have been some differences in findings and approaches by
previous systematic reviews and meta-analyses . Lam et al. concluded that there was limited evidence for associations between overall air pollution exposure in early life and ASD, but they found sufficient
evidence, most notably, between prenatal exposures to PM2.5 or PM10 and ASD. Flores-Pajot et al. investigated varied exposure times
and found evidence that prenatal exposure to PM2.5 and ozone and
postnatal exposure to PM2.5 and NO2 were associated with ASD.
Yang et al. pointed out that a semi-Bayesian logistic model might
improve the plausibility and stability of estimates. They discussed
the need for some well-designed studies with a large sample, less
misclassification or measurement of individual-level exposures,
and consideration of multiple confounders.
For meta-analysis there are four areas for further investigations

regarding associations between air pollutants and ASD development in children: which pollutant ,

to what extent , what method, and when . Adverse health effect of maternal exposures to ambient air pollution on children may vary
according to the exposure time. A natural question is: if there is a
critical time window of exposure that is more associated with ASD
development in children. In this systematic review, we conducted a systematic search of
literature on maternal exposure to ambient air pollution and ASD
since 2007, which resulted in an ultimate focus on PM2.5, PM10, NO2,
and ozone. This focus was mainly due to eligible studies’ availability, not our preference for the four pollutants. We also examined
the exposure time by trimester, considering fetal development
during pregnancy.
The protocol of this study was registered in PROSPERO. A systematic literature search
in Medline, Embase, and Web of Science was performed using the
combination of Medical Subject Headings  related to ASD
and maternal exposure  to air pollution since 2007. We included criteria air contaminants, haz-
ardous air pollutants and related pollutants , persistent organic pollutants ,
heavy metals, and toxicants. We used several keywords for HAP with the help of a librarian at the Ottawa
Hospital. Searches were limited to studies with an abstract published in the English language with a publication date between
We used Covidence  to screen studies based on title and abstract. Covidence is a Cochrane technology platform that
enables the whole review team to collaborate remotely by keeping
full records of who voted to include a study and capturing reasons
for exclusion so reviewers can resolve any disagreements. We 
identified eligible articles for this study using the following inclusion criteria:  study design was observational, including
ecological, case-control, and cohort studies; study participants
included children and/or mothers;  ASD diagnosis was made
based on clinical assessments, self-report questionnaires or structured interviews;  measure of air pollution exposure or during
conception and pregnancy  or at the time of birth (perinatal exposure) or during childhood 
and (5) information on the sample size and air pollution. The
exclusion criteria were: studies that used animal models;  full
article not in English; and  abstracts, case reports, comments,
reviews, conference proceedings, or book chapters. After reviewing abstracts, we short-listed full-text articles for
the eligibility assessment, uploading all the original studies to
Covidence and extracting data. Extracted information included:
authors, year of publication, title, journal, study location ,
study design, study population, case and control ,
exposure time and measurement method, ASD ascertainment
method, outcome, analysis model, covariates, and main findings
from each full-text article.
. Assessment of risk of bias Risk of bias was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality
Assessment Scale   and Lam et al.’s navigation guide . The NOS consists of eight items to evaluate
sources of bias, such as definition and selection of case and controls,
adequate sample size, comparability of cases and controls on the
basis of the design or analysis, and non-response rate. Studies were
given a maximum of 1 point for each of the seven items and 2
points for comparability only, making the maximum score 9 points.
Higher scores suggested a lower risk of bias. According to Lam
et al.’s navigation guide, we also rated each study as “high quality”,

“moderate quality” and “low quality” in terms of exposure assess-
ment, selective outcome reporting, and confidence in effect esti-
mates. We set up a cut-off score of 7 with the NOS and “moderate
quality” with the navigation guide for this review study to maintain
low risk of bias.
First, we categorized eligible studies by air pollutant , exposure time , study design, and modelling . The 4 exposure time periods were included to assess time-
varying associations. Second, we derived meta-estimates for ASD
associated with the 4 air pollutants. We applied both frequentist
and Bayesian approaches for fixed effect model and random effects
model for each air pollutant and each exposure time to calculate
the pooled odds ratios  per 10 units of that pollutant: PM2.5
and PM10 in mg/m3 and NO2 and ozone in parts per billion .
Since we were concerned with the small number of studies
included for each air pollutant, we employed a Bayesian random
effects model in addition to frequentist fixed and random effects
models. The Bayesian pooling method can reflect more uncertainty
of pooled OR than frequentist pooling . For a given
air pollutant, we assumed that the observed study-specific ORs were normally distributed with unknown true study-specific
mean and variance, and that the true study-specific means were
normally distributed with unknown air pollutant-specific mean 
and variance, which indicated the heterogeneity among the
Since information on both mean (mi) and variance ðs2
it was limited, non-informative priors, diffused over a large range for each
mean and standard deviation, were applied. In this study the median of the posterior distribution of the mean mi will be reported as
the meta-analysis pooled log  along with 95% posterior interval
Various tests for heterogeneity using I2 and Q-statistic with
degrees of freedom as well as the p-value of the test were done. In
addition, we included Egger test and Funnel plots to show the
publication bias since publication of positive findings has been an
important concern in meta-analytic reviews of the literature. The
degree of symmetry found in funnel plots indicates absence of
publication bias .
Sensitivity analyses over study design and exposure time were
also undertaken to assess the robustness of the results. All statistical analyses for this study were conducted using statistical
software R Stan and Metafor 
were identified through the search strategy, of which 994 publications were included once duplicates were removed. After
excluding studies that were non-human or non-air pollutant, 62
articles were short-listed for the full-text assessment, which
resulted in further exclusion of 37 articles for various reasons.
Finally, 25 eligible articles were included in our review.
 shows the characteristics of the included studies sorted
by publication year. The 25 eligible studies were conducted in 11
countries: USA , Sweden, Netherlands , Italy , Spain ,
Taiwan , China , Canada  Denmark , Iran , and Israel
 While 24 studies were done for a single country, a study by
Guxens et al. was conducted in the 4 countries in Europe simulta-
neously. As for study design, there were 21 case-control studies, 3
cohort studies, and 1 ecological study. While the case-control and
cohort designs were based on individual level data, the ecological
design used either exposure or ASD occurrence at group level.
Studies published between 2007 and 2019 were initially searched
to minimize discrepancy in their ASD definition and diagnosis
methods, considering recent year studies more comparable. Of

those, studies for 2010e2019 were considered for systematic review based on the four selected air pollutants, and studies for
were included for meta-analysis based on the exposure
time (trimesters and prenatal period), given the sudden increase in
the prevalence of ASD that might be related to broadening diagnostic criteria (Rice et al., 2012; Dawson and Bernier, 2013). This is
desirable for meta-analysis because it reduced between-study differences related to diagnosis methods.
Among the 25 eligible studies, 23, specifically assessed prenatal air pollution,
and of those, 11 included trimester-specific analyses. The most
commonly assessed air pollutant was PM10, which was included in 14 studies, followed by PM2.5 , NO2 , ozone , traffic-related air pollution , and SO2 . Nineteen studies identified ASD cases using records from
existing autism databases, such as the US Autism and Develop mental Disabilities Monitoring  Network, the California
Department of Developmental Services  and the British
Columbia Autism Assessment Network. Other studies utilized ASD
screening tools, such as the Autism-Tics, ADHD, and other Comorbidities ( inventory, to ascertain cases to be included in the
studies. The other 2 studies used maternal reports and validated by
Autism Diagnostic Interview .
See more details on model covariates, air pollutant concentration
measurement methods, and ASD ascertainment methods in
Table A1 in Appendix. We looked at the studies by study period
since the prevalence of ASD has risen dramatically in recent years
and there is a need to see how air pollution might be contributing
to the increased prevalence. However, recent studies with recent
birth cohort show that there is no association between maternal air
pollution exposure and ASD indicating that little was known about
the potential association between exposure and ASD.
We applied both the NOS and Lam
et al.’s navigation guide to the 25 eligible studies based on their
characteristics in Table 1 and Table A1. By inclusion/
exclusion criteria we found that four air pollutants had at least 3 comparable studies with comparable

exposure time, which were required for meta-
analysis. We excluded 11 studies since they reported other air

pollutants , examined pre-conception or post-natal
period , or other reasons  , from which 14 studies remained for our meta-analysis. Both
screening tools resulted in the same quality of the 14 selected
studies for the meta-analysis. The 14 studies had a median score of
8 (out of 9) from the NOS, and high or moderate quality from the
navigation guide, indicating low bias.
3.4. Study findings from systematic review: association between air
pollutants and ASD per 8.87 mg/m3

, respectively. In 2018, however, 2 other studies,
Goodrich et al. and Kerin et al., found no association, even though
their study populations also consisted of Californian children. In
2015, Raz et al. found an increased OR of 1.42  per
4.40 mg/m3 especially for trimester 3 based on the Nurses’ Health
Study II. Furthermore, in 2017 Kim et al. found PM2.5 and total copy
number variations (CNV), a type of genomic changes that
contribute to autism susceptibility, together were associated with a
higher risk of ASD than PM2.5 alone. There is also evidence to
suggest an association between postnatal PM2.5 exposure and ASD.
In 2018, Chen et al. found that PM2.5 exposure in the 2nd and 3rd
year of life resulted in an OR of 1.50 (1.01, 2.22) and 1.78 (1.05, 3.02),
respectively, per 3.4 mg/m3

. As well, in 2018 Ritz et al. reported that
at 9 months of age, there is an OR of 1.04  per 3.61 mg/m3
.
Excluding 4 studies  due to ecological study designs,
different methods of ascertaining cases and controls, or longer
exposure time (e.g., prenatal and postnatal period combined), we

included the remaining 9 studies for our meta-analysis. Meta-an-
alyses with 11 studies with postnatal studies were done in the sensitivity analysis later.
Association between PM10 and ASD. Nine studies were
considered for the meta-estimate and Table C2 summarizes the
study-specific ORs. While 4 studies estimated the OR for each
trimester and the prenatal period, 1 study (Kalkbrenner et al., 2015)
did for T1, T2 and T3 separately only, and 2 studies (Gong et al.,
2017; Guxens et al., 2016) did for T4 only. The heterogeneity test

(Q(df 1⁄4 8) 1⁄4 20.33, p-val 1⁄4 .0092, I2 1⁄4 74.96%) suggests consider-
able heterogeneity among the studies. The meta-estimates from 3

methods (Fig. 3) indicate no significant ORs (See Fig. F2 for log-scale
in Appendix F.).
3.5.1.3. Association between NO2 and ASD. Seven studies were
considered for the meta-estimate and Table C3 summarizes the

study-specific ORs. The heterogeneity test (Q(df 1⁄4 6) 1⁄4 17.58, p-
val 1⁄4 .0074, I2 1⁄4 58.31%) suggests considerable heterogeneity

among the studies. The meta-estimates show no significant ORs
(Fig. 4). The frequentist fixed and random models returned same
and significant ORs, but the Bayesian random effects model did not:
1.02 (1.01, 1.03), 1.02 (1.01, 1.04), and 1.02 (1.00, 1.05) per 10 ppb
from fixed, random and Bayesian models, respectively (See Fig. F3
for log-scale in Appendix F.).
3.5.1.4. Association between ozone and ASD. Four studies were
considered for the meta-estimate and Table C4 summarizes the

study-specific ORs. The heterogeneity test  suggests no heterogeneity. The meta-estimates

of ozone returned inconsistent results between frequentist and
Bayesian models 
3.5.2. Time-specific associations with ASD
3.5.2.1. During pregnancy . Guxens et al. reported the ORs for
the prenatal period only  for EU and 4 individual countries. We

considered this particular study as one for meta-
analysis. We checked publication bias through funnel plots for

prenatal period (only (not shown). None displayed considerable
publication bias, as all plots showed symmetric distributions. In
addition, Egger’s test  was not statistically
significant, so there’s no evidence of publication bias according to
this test (Egger et al., 1997). Among the 4 air pollutants, PM2.5 and
ozone returned the highest and lowest OR, respectively .
The two frequentist fixed and random effects models returned
significant pooled OR for PM2.5 and ozone, but not for PM10 and NO2
. No Bayesian model
returned significant pooled OR.

3.5.2.2. First trimester . Table C5 summarizes the meta-
estimates for trimester 1. PM2.5 and ozone returned the highest

and lowest OR, respectively. Both frequentist models returned significant OR for PM2.5 and NO2,
whereas Bayesian random effects models did not for PM10, NO2 and
ozone 

3.5.2.3. Second trimester . Table C6 summarizes meta-
estimates for trimester 2. Again PM2.5 and ozone returned the

highest and lowest OR, respectively. Both frequentist models
3.5.2.5. Temporal changes in associations over trimesters.. 6
displays eight studies with inconsistent temporal patterns and a
meta-estimate for PM2.5 only. Overall, they showed most and least
consistency for T1 and T3, respectively. Combining the 8 studies,
the Bayesian meta-estimates returned a slightly increasing trend
but not statistically significant changes in the ORs: 1.02, 1.04, and
1.04, for trimesters 1 to 3, respectively.

For PM2.5, PM10, NO2, and ozone, Table C8 summarizes meta-
estimates. Overall, except for NO2, an increasing trend over the

trimester was in common among the 4 air pollutants.
. Sensitivity analysis.  overall shows little bias

of publication.  demonstrates each study’s relative contri-
bution to the meta-estimates for each air pollutant. We found 1 to 3

studies contributed at least 20% of each pollutant: two out of 9
studies (Volk et al., and Ritz et al.) for PM2.5; three out of 9 studies
To focus on maternal exposure, our meta-analysis excluded two
studies in Table 1 because they reported the ORs for a postnatal
period only (Jung et al., 2013) or a combined period with prenatal

period (Kim et al., 2017) but included 5 studies that reported pre-conception or post-natal periods along with prenatal period


If one study included before  and after post-natal)the prenatal period , respectively, we included the study

as 3 individual studies with each exposure time. Thus the number
of studies is bigger than reported in Table C9. The meta-estimates of
ORs within each air pollutant are consistently higher for the period
of prenatal or post-natal combined but lower for the period of
prenatal or pre-conception combined. Overall meta-estimates of
the prenatal combined with postnatal period appeared to be higher
than the prenatal period only.
temporal trend in associations during pregnancy cannot be

concluded due to the discrepancies between studies and the dis-
agreements in significance between meta-analysis methods (sig-
nificance by frequentist vs insignificance by Bayesian).

It is widely recognized that the etiology of ASD is complex and

related to many factors, including genetic background, environ-
mental risk factors, and gene-environment interactions (Landrigan

et al., 2012; Dawson and Bernier, 2013). Earlier research on the
cause of ASD focused largely on genetic changes or mutations
(Autism Genome Project Consortium et al., 2007; Landrigan et al.,
2012; Von Ehrenstein et al., 2014). However, it is now understood
that the perinatal period is critical for brain development. Thus
exposure to environmental chemicals during this time could
disturb normal neurodevelopment (Eskenazi et al., 2007;

Landrigan et al., 2012; Ye et al., 2017), therefore providing a plau-
sible link between environmental risk factors and ASD. Our sys-
tematic review, which is updated by including more recent studies,

provides similar findings to the previous studies (Becerra et al.,
2013; Raz et al., 2015). While there was some evidence indicating
maternal exposure to PM2.5 may increase the risk of ASD, evidence
for the effect of ozone, PM10, and NO2 on ASD is weak or limited. An
increase in the number of studies for a future meta-analysis would
improve statistical power to identify associations between air
pollutants and ASD.
This systematic review summarized 25 studies that examined

the association between maternal exposure to ambient air pollut-
ants and ASD in children. The study findings were inconsistent and

meta-analyses were applied to pool the study results. We grouped
the study-specific ORs by air pollutant (PM2.5, PM10, NO2, and
ozone) and exposure time (trimesters), and found limited evidence
for positive associations. Among the four air pollutants, PM2.5
resulted in the highest OR for the prenatal period: 1.06(1.01,1.11)
and 1.06(1.00,1.13) from frequentist and Bayesian random effects
model, respectively. The odds of ASD in children were 6% higher
through maternal exposure to PM2.5. However, PM2.5 is a mixture of
various fine particles, and thus further investigations to examine
specific PM components linked to ASD are necessary to analyze this
difference between PM2.5 and the other three pollutants.
Exposure time differences in 4 pre-determined periods

(trimester 1 to 3 and prenatal) and 2 more extended periods to pre-
conception and postnatal period were examined under sensitivity

analysis. All meta-estimates were comparable, implying little dif-
ference regarding exposure time related to pregnancy. However,

there was an uncertain indication that postnatal exposures might
be more linked to the ASD than pre-conception, which was

consistent among the 4 pollutants. The trend in the trimester-
specific ORs was investigated. Trimester 3 was found to be more

associated with the ASD than the others. The myelin sheath is a
plasma membrane extension that is laid down in regularly spaced
segments along axons of the nervous system. This process involves
extensive changes in oligodendrocyte cell shape and membrane
architecture. Myelination starts around 24e25 weeks of gestation
and reaches its peak by 1 year of age (Purves et al., 2012). Imaging
and biopsy of the brains of autistic children have shown a deficit in
myelination as compared to normal children (Aoki et al., 2013;
Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2010). Such a diminution would weaken the
operation of the axon-target synapse, thereby accounting for the
malfunction of areas of the brain involved in behavior. This would
include the prefrontal and temporal areas of the brain. As the
myelination process starts late second trimester, it could have more
impact on the third trimester. This might explain a finding of this
study that the associations between air pollution and the ASD are
likely higher for the third trimester compared to the others A temporal trend in associations during pregnancy cannot be

concluded due to the discrepancies between studies and the dis-
agreements in significance between meta-analysis methods (sig-
nificance by frequentist vs insignificance by Bayesian).

It is widely recognized that the etiology of ASD is complex and

related to many factors, including genetic background, environ-
mental risk factors, and gene-environment interactions (Landrigan

et al., 2012; Dawson and Bernier, 2013). Earlier research on the
cause of ASD focused largely on genetic changes or mutations
(Autism Genome Project Consortium et al., 2007; Landrigan et al.,
2012; Von Ehrenstein et al., 2014). However, it is now understood
that the perinatal period is critical for brain development. Thus
exposure to environmental chemicals during this time could
disturb normal neurodevelopment (Eskenazi et al., 2007;

Landrigan et al., 2012; Ye et al., 2017), therefore providing a plau-
sible link between environmental risk factors and ASD. Our sys-
tematic review, which is updated by including more recent studies,

provides similar findings to the previous studies (Becerra et al.,
2013; Raz et al., 2015). While there was some evidence indicating
maternal exposure to PM2.5 may increase the risk of ASD, evidence
for the effect of ozone, PM10, and NO2 on ASD is weak or limited. An
increase in the number of studies for a future meta-analysis would
improve statistical power to identify associations between air
pollutants and ASD.
4.1. Difference by exposure time
The five studies in 6 show difference between trimesters. In

practice, the difference can be detected when the maternal expo-
sure concentrations vary over time or when some effect modifiers

including behaviors (physical and mental) changes over time. For
example, the former can be explained if the mothers avoided going
outside during a specific trimester, and the latter can result if they
were on medications or dietary supplements for a specific
trimester.
While two air pollution studies (Kalkbrenner et al., 2015; Raz
et al., 2015) concluded ASD associations to be specific to the third
trimester, the mechanism remains largely unknown. Weisskopf
et al. (2015) speculated that women working outside the home
may be more focused on prescribed rest or maternal leave in the
third trimester. This work-pattern change may open more time for
outside activities which in turn could affect the amount of PM
exposure, However, other potentially relevant studies on physical
and mental behavior changes suggest varied results, often in
different trimesters with involvement of certain biological events
or personal behavior (Weisskopf et al., 2015; Ng et al., 2017).

Attempts were made to quantify changes in leisure-time phys-
ical activity (LTPA) during the first half of pregnancy compared with

the year prior to pregnancy (Amezcua-Prieto et al., 2013). After
studying 1175 healthy pregnant women, it was concluded that
pregnancy involved a decrease in LTPA, not only in frequency, but
also duration and intensity. Physical activity can be further reduced
due to musculoskeletal pain in the back, hand-wrist and hip, factors
which complicate pregnancy and mobility especially in the third
trimester (Kesikburun et al., 2018). As pregnancy progresses, a
period of emotional and behavioral changes (Lagadec et al., 2018)
ensues. This can include: different nutritional choices, efforts to
quit smoking and gestational weight gain (Levine et al., 2015). An

increase in stress can follow causing a depletion of metabolic re-
sources. Seebacher et al. (2013) concluded that in late-stage preg-
nancy, the metabolic cost of activity or behavior could render

reproduction sensitive to environmental changes.
It should be noted that the maternal exposures by trimester are

correlated, which would reduce statistical power to detect differ-
ences in ASD development of children by trimester. Studies focusing on time-varying associations will be necessary before a
conclusion can be reached regarding a critical time window of
exposure associated with an increased risk of ASD development.
Identifying the critical exposure time may become an important
step in guiding and counseling pregnant women.
Strengths of this review
Our approach for systematic review in this study is not much
different from other systematic studies on the ASD. For example,
search strategy and meta-analysis are comparable. However, we

focused on five areas including study publication time, environ-
mental cause of the ASD, target population, meta-analysis method

and time-varying associations. (1) We examined more recent
studies published by April 2019 and thus could update study
findings. (2) The environmental causes of the ASD are still unknown

and we focused on specific ambient air pollution. (3) As the diag-
nosis methods ASD have changed, we focused, in particular, on

children to reduce the discrepancy in diagnosis ASD. (4) As
mentioned in Discussion, we compared three meta-analysis
methods: frequentist fixed and random effects models, and
Bayesian random effect model. (5) We demonstrated inconsistent
time-varying associations over trimesters between air pollutants
and between studies. We believe that this study added updated
findings in these five areas.
Applying a Bayesian random effects model and its associated

rigors is the primary strength. While the fixed effects model con-
siders sampling variation within individual studies only, the

random effects model also consider between-study variations, thus

producing larger standard error of estimates (wider interval esti-
mates). There are 2 approaches for the random effects model, the

frequentist and Bayesian methods. Typically, the frequentist
random effects model has been applied to most meta-analysis: for
example, recently by Lam et al. (2016) and Flores-Pajot et al. 

A small sampling of studies often results in considerable discrep-
ancies between these methods. When discrepancies appear, . 2e5, the Bayesian estimates are more reliable in
integrating multiple studies on the same or comparable research

questions, even though they return weaker evidence than the fre-
quentist estimates. In addition, there is another reason to consider

the Bayesian model: when there are unusually higher or lower
study estimates than the others. For example, Volk et al.
returned higher ORs with relatively smaller intervals compared to

the other studies. The influence of this specific study on the meta-
estimate is reduced by the Bayesian model. This is also a preferred

feature for integrating multi-study results by reducing bias in meta-
analysis.

Secondly, the differences in exposure-time during pregnancy for
each pollutant was evaluated. The time variation pattern can differ
among pollutants. While one could be more critical to the earliest
stage of pregnancy, others could affect later stages of pregnancy.
Previous studies centered mainly on the entire pregnancy period
and assumed the association constant with pregnancy. While
Flores-Pajot et al.  captured critical exposure windows during
pregnancy  the conclusion

was that there is a need to track residential mobility during preg-
nancy to account for changes in exposure. Similarly, Lam et al.

 highlighted the inaccuracy of exposure assessment
methods in their study limitations. Flores-Pajot et al. and Lam et al.
considered misclassifications of exposures during pregnancy. To
understand observed differences between trimesters, this study
considered maternal changes in physical, behavioral and emotional
aspects.
Lyall et al. confirm that several studies have shown sig-
nificant increases in ASD risk associated with particulate matter

and heavy metals. However, diesel exhaust, chemicals from traffic-
related pollutants and heavy metals could not be examined since

many studies reported the 4 air pollutants only. Studies
with long-term exposure time  were
excluded since many mainly reported the prenatal period. We
reviewed articles in English only and thus our meta-analysis
excluded other study results reported in non-English languages.
This could bring in unexpected and unmeasurable bias in our meta-
estimates, which is also a limitation of this review.
In a scoping review for environmental factors associated with
ASD, Ng et al.  summarized the risk factors as: traffic-related
air pollutants; advanced parental age; preterm birth; low birth
weight; hyperbilirubinemia and clustering of pregnancy compli-
cations; and maternal immigrant status. These factors for the meta-
analysis could not be considered due to limited studies. Due to
these limitations, this study focused on the 4 air pollutants for
prenatal period only.
This study reports meta-estimates of the OR based on several
case-control studies, which is the ratio of odds of exposure among
the cases to that of the controls. The OR approximates the relative
risk, which estimates the magnitude of the association between
exposure to the specified ambient air pollutants and the ASD. While
the OR provides relative difference between exposed and unex-
posed groups, another measuredattributable riskdindicates ab-
solute difference in the incidence of the ASD between the two
groups. It quantifies the incidence of the ASD in the exposed group
that could be reduced if not exposed. However, this study cannot
provide the attributable risk, since the incidence could not be
determined from the case-control studies examined in this study.
With the small, barely significant ORs , we
expect the contribution of the specified pollutants to the overall
prevalence of ASD is quite small.
Our meta-analysis on the association between maternal exposure to ambient air pollution during the prenatal period and ASD in
children has produced some evidence for PM2.5, weak evidence for
NO2, little evidence for PM10, and inconclusive evidence for ozone
. The time-varying effects of
maternal exposure over the 3 trimesters were inconsistent, and our
meta-analysis returned insignificant changes over trimester.
However the noticeable difference in the trimesters among studies
merits further investigation.

Air pollution is a major public health and economic issue. associated with increased risk of mortality and morbidity in multiple diseases, such as cancer , inflammatory , neurological  and respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases . Despite the considerable number of studies demonstrating the adverse health effects of air

pollution, exposure to ambient air pollution surrounding pregnancy and the risk for Autism Spectrum disorder in newborns remains controversial. Genetic and environmental

factors specifically during perinatal periods have been found to increase risk of pathology and malformation in children . Air pollution is composed of a wide range of pollutants
such as particulate matter , nitrogen oxide , volatile
organic compounds, pesticides, ozone  and metals. Though few studies have focused
on pregnancy and risk of ASD, air pollutants such as PM , appear to have the
highest levels of toxicity . Among PM10, PM2.5 which have
an even smaller aerodynamic diameter 2.5 mm are particularly harmful, penetrating more rapidly, easily and deeply into the organism . 

Despite a recent article , no metaanalysis to date has
provided an overview or comparison of the effects of classes of air
pollutants , or the effects of sociodemographic risk factors such as parental ages, gender of newborns, or smoking.
In addition, there are no published guidelines as yet on how to
manage different data relating to a same risk within an included
article and no meta-analysis presented both risks quantified either as continuous or
as categorical variables.
We hypothesized that there was an increased risk of developing

ASD associated with air pollution during pregnancy. This metaanalysis focused on the association between children with ASD

and exposure to air pollutants during the perinatal period and involved three models
for each meta-analysis by air pollutant; a global model using all
risks listed in included articles, a pessimistic model using less
favorable data only, and an optimistic model using the most
favorable data only. We also investigated related sociodemographic
influences.

We reviewed all studies reporting an association between air
pollutants and ASD. The PubMed, Cochrane Library, ScienceDirect

and Embase databases were searched for all original articles published up to July 2020, using the keywords “air pollution” and “autism” or synonyms. Inclusion criteria included articles written in English or French, and that described our primary outcome variable i.e. the
association between perinatal exposure to ambient air pollution
and risk of ASD. The perinatal period included the preconception
period to the second year of life. Studies were required to report
risk estimates in the form of odds ratios  with 95% confidence
interval or to provide data that allowed OR calculation. In
order to identify studies not found through our database search
strategy, a manually search of new articles was carried out using
reference lists from all publications meeting inclusion criteria and
systematic reviews. Our search strategy is presented in and Two authors separately conducted all
literature searches, collated and, reviewed the abstracts based on
selection criteria and decided on the suitability of articles for inclusion. When questions arose over article suitability, a third author
reviewed the articles. Having reached a consensus, all
included articles were reviewed by the three authors.
The methodological quality of the studies was further evaluated
using the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network model
for case control and cohort studies.
The following 15 items were assessed: appropriate and clearly
focused question, selection bias , performance bias , attrition bias , detection bias , confusion
bias , presence of confidence intervals, and general level of
evidence . Similar items were used to evaluate case control
studies . We also used the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality
Assessment Scale model with the following 9
items: selection bias, comparability bias and
outcome bias . Each item was assigned a judgment of , or with the exception of item 2.1 and the final item concerning evidence level
of the SIGN checklist, which was assigned . Any
disagreements over suitability were discussed with a third author and a consensus reached. Assessment of article quality was
carried out for the two checklists by two authors .

The following data from articles were recorded: title, name of
first author, journal and year of publication, main objective, time of

exposure to air pollution , type and concentration of pollutants, crude and/or
adjusted OR and lower and upper limits, and population characteristics 
 Characteristics of pollutant exposure, of individuals or other variables were reported
for each study as mean ± standard-deviation (SD) and number (%)
for continuous and categorical variables respectively.
When data could be pooled, we conducted random effects meta-
analyses on the risk of ASD in newborns following air
pollutants exposure, centered at one. Particular attention was paid
to the type of statistics retrieved from the included articles . Air pollutants exposure were quantified

either as a continuous  or as categorical variables . For the highest level

of proof, we first normalized all OR for a standardized increment in
pollutant concentration . We took into account the original increment of the
pollutant and we assumed a linear exposure outcome relationship
(Shah et al., 2013b) using the following equation. When air pollutant levels were expressed in
parts per billion (ppb), we transformed those levels in mg/m3The effects expressed as interquartile (or quintile, or

percentile differences) were converted into effects per concentra-
tion unit increase with the previous equation  Meta-analyses were computed by type of air pollutants
periconceptional periods, and pregnancy trimester where sufficient data were available. For
each meta-analysis, three models were used Finally, we computed the aforementioned
meta-analyses categorical using OR based on categorical exposure
 For air pollutants that were the most reported, we also computed sensitivity analyses depending on the
methods to measure air pollutants. Heterogeneity between studies
was evaluated through forest plots, and their confidence intervals
(CI), and I-squared For example, a significant heterogeneity may be due to the
variability between the characteristics of the studies, such as the
exposure to air pollutants (type of air pollutants), periconceptional
periods (preconception, pregnancy, postnatal), pregnancy
trimester (first, second, third), characteristics of individuals (age of
mothers and fathers, smoking, gender of newborns, etc). To ensure
the robustness of our results, we conducted sensitivity analysis by
searching for potential publication bias through funnel plots

 of aforementioned meta-analyses. Then, we reper-
formed meta-analyses without the studies that were not evenly

distributed around the funnel base . When sample
size allowed, meta-regressions were performed to investigate the
relationship between risk of ASD in newborns following air
pollutant exposure and putative variables such as type of air

pollutant, periconceptional period, pregnancy trimester and population characteristics. Results were expressed as regression coefficients and 95% CI.

Use of the SIGN model, notably revealed selection and attrition
bias in included studies. Most studies had a high level of evidence.
Detailed characteristics of methodological quality assessment for
each included study are provided in Fig. 2. Overall, for the SIGN
model, most studies were shown to have a high level of evidence
but performed, with lowest performance found response rate. The
NOS model was also used to analyse the quality of included articles
Aims of included studies, study designs, and settings
All studies shared a similar objective i.e. the association of
exposure to air pollution  during the perinatal period and the development of
ASD.  the optimistic model only, an increased risk during pregnancy with
both the global and optimistic models, and an increased risk
regardless of the model used during the postnatal period.
The main findings revealed that air pollution particularly that of
PM2.5 during the periconception period was associated with an
increased risk of ASD in newborns, in all models used. The level of

evidence is poor for other air pollutants. Exposure during preg-
nancy  and postnatal periods may be the

most at-risk periods. The increased risk of ASD following exposure

to air pollutants surrounding pregnancy was not linked with soci-
odemographic factors.
We demonstrated that global air pollution exposure in the
perinatal period is a risk factor for ASD in newborns
perinatal period is a risk factor for ASD in newborns . Despite a previous meta-analysis , there

is the first to report a risk based on consideration of all air pollutants. As, exposures are in general multiple when quantifying risk, it

is likely that overall risk is of most interest as reported by other
authors
allowed analysis of several included studies presenting different
data for the same risk. There are presently no guidelines on how to manage
this issue. To avoid potential limitations, we
created three models for each meta-analysis; a global model based
on all risks reported in included articles, a pessimistic model using
less favorable risks only , and an optimistic
model using the most favorable risks only. Unsurprisingly, use of
optimistic models led to stronger results, but notably, we were
unable to demonstrate an increased risk using the pessimistic
model based on all air pollutants.
Risk of developing ASD in newborns increased using the global
and optimistic models only for all air pollutants, with a strong high
risk following exposure to PM2.5 whatever the model. Even use of
the pessimistic model based on the least favorable data (those with
the least increased risk) revealed a minimum increased risk of 6%
(up to 15% using the optimistic model). Nearly all individual studies
showed that maternal exposure to PM2.5 was associated with
increased risk of newborns with ASD
Thus indicating the
high level of evidence concerning the deleterious effects of PM2.5
and related risk of ASD. PM2.5 particles appear to be the most
dangerous pollutant due to their small size, and high volatility
able to be transported over longer distances . They also have a lower sedimentation velocity than other
larger particles such as PM10 69. PM are primarily composed of
toxic particles such as PAHs, inorganic particles, or organic carbon metals
Late pregnancy and early postnatal periods were found to be the
most at-risk periods for developing ASD following air pollution

exposure. These periods are crucial in the development of the infant , and can influence long-term health

outcomes. Late pregnancy is important for placental function, fetal growth and brain developments

and is also the period when maternal and fetal complications can
occur, such as gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, hypoxia or brain
injury (Dugan and Ma-Crawford, 2019; Ellery et al., 2018;
Schumacher et al., 2020; Ridder et al., 2019). Our result showing
increased risk of ASD during late pregnancy is in accordance with
previous meta-analyses . Similarly, the early
postnatal period can also impact health outcomes as has been

shown with breastfeeding which may impact a wide range of parameters such as cognition, brain structure, structural development

of the heart and lungs, bone health, or atopy . In comparison with the meta-analysis of Chun
et al., we highlighted the detrimental effects of air pollution leading

to increased risk of ASD during the postnatal period, being previously analyzed in relation to the prenatal period. Our results show

that the most at-risk periods for ASD were early and late pregnancy
and the early postnatal period. These results are in accordance with
other studies on air pollution that have showed these periods to

also be the most at-risk for other birth outcomes such as hyper-
tension, preeclampsia, pre-term birth, or low birthweight . Both late pregnancy
neurodevelopmental outcomes such as ASD. In our meta-analysis,
neither parental age or newborn genders were found to influence

risk following exposure to air pollutants. However, our meta-
regressions analyzed whether air pollution modifies this risk

depending on parental age or newborn genders. Other investigated
putative risk factors for ASD include maternal food intake , low birthweight or preterm birth. As these factors were not assessed in
the articles included in our meta-analysis, further analyses were
precluded.

Our study has some limitations. Despite the large number of
studies, some air pollutants were only included in a few studies.

Common air pollutants such as PM2.5, PM10, or NOx, were however commonly assessed and as we included a large sample of 395

615 newborns, this allowed the greater generalizability of our results. Our meta-analysis inherited the limitations of the 28 included

studies and was therefore subject to individual bias such as bias of
measures of exposure to air pollutants and bias of reporting of ASD.
Despite the quality of research reflected in the studies included in
our meta-analyses, ASD covers a wide range of severity that was not
reported within included articles. Diagnostic method for ASD also
differed, limiting quality of data and precluding further analyses,

although, most articles used National ASD databases thus guaranteeing data accuracy. A further limitation concerns a possible underestimation of our results. Diagnostic evidence of ASD can be

underestimated but is unlikely to be overestimated. Similarly,
methods for detection or measurement of air pollutant exposure
differed between studies, thus precluding assessment of dose

response effects. In addition despite similarities, population characteristics between studies were not identical. Data were collected

in various countries, but excluded developing countries. The majority of studies were conducted in the USA

from Africa, Asia, and Oceania reduces potential generalizability of
our results, though. All ethnicities were included. Generalizability
of our results may also be lessened due to analysis of single-site
studies, even if the majority of included studies were multi-site.
As studies differed in their study design, we performed sensitivity
analyses allowing demonstration of similar results whatever the
design. In our meta-analysis global model, some included studies
appeared several times, with different data for the same outcome
depending on adjustment models. In the absence of clear

consensus and despite having more effect sizes within each meta analyses when compared with studies included in several highlyregarded published articles published

articles published, the weight of studies may have required

ponderation  This is one of the reasons for use of optimistic and pessimistic models when only one

data is available for each included article. A further limitation of our
meta-analysis concerns included studies using OR adjusted on
different factors between studies, even if adjusted OR may limit

confusion bias. Finally, causality may also be a limitation in retro-
spective or case-control studies.

Exposure to air pollution, notably PM2.5 during pregnancy was
associated with an increased risk of ASD in newborns regardless of

the model used. The level of evidence concerning other air pol-
lutants is however poor. Exposure during pregnancy and the

postnatal period appear to be the most at-risk periods.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
The dreams of many infertile couples to have offspring(s) have been made possible by assisted reproductive technology . Through its constant development, morbidity
due to infertility has been massively decreased . Every technique, such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection  and frozen embryo transfer, is designed as solutions for specific problems. For example, in cases where two previous conventional in vitro fertilization  failed, or if the

majority of sperms are immotile, ICSI is the technique
that offers the highest possibility to acquire pregnancy  Meanwhile, when couples preferred to obtain
pregnancy, cryopreservation enables
them to freeze embryos for implantation at later times .
Studies on prenatal and postnatal outcomes in ART,
such as the risks of multiple pregnancies and congenital
malformations, have already been comprehensively
reviewed and meta-analyzed on previous publications

[4–10]. Conversely, lesser number of studies have fo-
cused on the neurodevelopmental aspects of children

from ART. The nature of certain neurodevelopmental
disorders that might not be visible until later stage in
children’s lives, difficulties in obtaining long-term
follow-up, and the fact that many disorders can only be
diagnosed and treated in a multidisciplinary fashion
might be some of the reasons that caused limitation in
the number of studies on neurodevelopmental outcomes
in these children. Nonetheless, several studies have been
published to date, and it is important to gain consensual
conclusions on the actual risks of neurodevelopmental
disorders among these children.

This study aims to assess the risks of neurodevelopmental abnormalities in children from ART treatments,

in comparison to naturally conceived children through

meta-analysis. As different ART treatments may translate into different pathophysiology, the neurodevelop-
mental outcomes in children from different ART

techniques are also compared.
Methods
Literature search and identification
This systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted
according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses 
reporting guidelines. PubMed, Scopus, and Google
scholars’ databases were used to collect publications up
to January 16, 2020. The following search terms were
applied: reproductive techniques, assisted OR assisted
reproductive OR in vitro fertilization OR in vitro

fertilization AND Child development OR adolescent de-
velopment OR long term follow-up OR Developmental

disabilities OR Developmental disability OR Language
disorders OR Language disorder OR Neurodevelopment

OR mental disorder OR mental disorders OR neuro-
psychiatry. Additional studies were identified through

screening of the reference lists.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Studies were included if they ) compared any neurode-
velopment aspects in ART children to children from

natural conceptions, and  described the neurodeve-
lopment in children from common ART techniques, in-
cluding conventional IVF, ICSI, cryopreserved, and fresh

embryo transfers, then compared them to either children
in general population or children conceived by different

treatment modalities. Studies were excluded if  infor-
mation were insufficient, particularly related to the sub-
jects and parameters in the study, not including

original data, such as reviews, systematic reviews, com-
ments, or editorial letters, not including control

group, or could not ascertain the used
fertility treatment, and not written in English.
Data collection and analysis
The title and abstract of every article were independently
reviewed by 3 authors . If the abstract

met the inclusion criteria, the full-text article was thoroughly reviewed. Reference lists on the identified publications were screened for previously unidentified but

relevant studies. The following information were re-
trieved: author, country, publication year, number of pa-
tients, criteria of neurodevelopmental disorders, and the

patients’ neurodevelopmental outcomes. The quality of
methodology was assessed using the risk of bias criteria
that were specified in Newcastle-Ottawa Scale 
Based on the final ratings, high-quality studies
 were included in the meta-analyses.
Statistical analysis
Meta-analysis was performed using Mantel-Haenszel

risk ratio  with 95% confidence interval for dichot-
omous data. Meta-analysis was performed on subgroup

analysis based on the types of the acquired neurodevelopmental disorders, including cerebral palsy, intellectual

disability, autism spectrum disorder, and behavioral

problems. To describe the overall risk of neurodevelopmental disorders, a meta-analysis of the overall data was

also conducted. The RevMan version 5.3 software
 was used for these purposes
Inconsistency index  test, which ranges from 0 to
100%, was calculated to evaluate heterogeneity across
studies. Values above 50% or p value < 0.10 indicate a
significant heterogeneity. Regression-based Egger’s test
was used to evaluate small study effect and the risk of
publication bias. p values less than 0.05 were considered
as significant bias. Cochrane Risk of Bias Assessment
tool  was used to assess the

risk of bias. Certainty of the evidence quality was evaluated by using the Guideline Development Tool by GRADEpro.


The literature searches identified 1511 studies. Addition-
ally, 32 studies were identified through reference screen-
ing . In total, 181 full-text articles were reviewed,

and only 17 articles fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Based
on the Newcastle-Ottawa scale ratings, 7 studies 
were excluded. Thus, 10 studies  were included

in the meta-analyses, including 8 cohorts and 2 case-
control studies. Newcastle-Ottawa Scale results for the

cohort studies are described on Supplemental Table 1,
while descriptions of the case-control studies are
reviewed . Characteristics of
the included studies are presented 
ART vs natural conception
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy was reported in 5 studies
 with an absolute
risk of 7 per 1000 births at ART group and 4 per 1000
births at baseline population. No risk of publication bias  and no small study bias
Risk of intellectual disability was reported in 5 studies  Risk of intellectual dis-
ability in children born after ART treatments was not
different from the risk in children from natural conceptions, with the same absolute risk of 3 per
1000 births . Risk of publication
bias  and small-study bias  were undetected

Risk of autism spectrum disorder
Six studies reported the risk of ASD

One study  was excluded as it did not include children from natural conceptions as control. The risk of acquiring ASD in ART children is insignificantly different

with its risk in naturally conceived children

with identical absolute risk at 6 per 1000 births Risk of publication bias and small-study biaswere unidentified 
Behavioral problems
Risk of behavioral problems was reported in 2 studies
 and the results showed no differences in this
risk between ART and naturally conceived group 
. The absolute risk is 19 children per 1000 births at ART group and 18 per 1000 births at naturally conceived group . Risk of bias and
small-study effects could not be estimated due to limited
studies 
Meta-analysis on the overall data showed that ART
children have a higher overall risk of neurodevelopmental disorders. Heterogeneity was identified for the

overall studies, and this might be due to cofounder effects. The overall studies showed no risk of publication
biasand no small-study bias
 The absolute risk effect showed no increase in number of children born with neurodevelopmental disorders with a baseline population risk of 3 per 1000

births (Supplemental Table 5).
ICSI vs conventional IVF 
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy in children from ICSI and
conventional IVF was reported in 2 studies. ICSI

procedure causes no increase in the prevalence of cere-
bral palsy compared to conventional Risk of intellectual disability

Risk of intellectual disability   was reported

in 5 studies Risk of intellectual disability in children born after ART treatments was not

different from the risk in children from natural concep-
tions, with the same absolute risk of 3 per
1000 births . Risk of publication
bias (and small-study bias were undetected 

Risk of autism spectrum disorder
Six studies reported the risk of ASD

One study [24] was excluded as it did not include children from natural conceptions as control. The risk of acquiring ASD in ART children is insignificantly different

with its risk in naturally conceived children

with identical absolute risk at 6 per 1000 births Risk of publication bias  and small-study bias were unidentified (Supplemental Table 4).
Behavioral problems
Risk of behavioral problems was reported in 2 studies
[20, 29], and the results showed no differences in this
risk between ART and naturally conceived group
The absolute risk is 19 children per 1000 births

at ART group and 18 per 1000 births at naturally conceived group  Risk of bias and

small-study effects could not be estimated due to limited
studies .
Meta-analysis on the overall data showed that ART

children have a higher overall risk of neurodevelopmen-
tal disorders Heterogeneity was identified for the

overall studies, and this might be due to cofounder effects. The overall studies showed no risk of publication

bias and no small-study bias . The absolute risk effect showed no increase in

number of children born with neurodevelopmental disorders with a baseline population risk of 3 per 1000 births 
ICSI vs conventional IVF
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy in children from ICSI and
conventional IVF was reported in 2 studies [22, 26]. ICSI

procedure causes no increase in the prevalence of cerebral palsy compared to conventional Risk of intellectual disability

Risk of intellectual disability  was reported

in 5 studies Risk of intellectual disability in children born after ART treatments was not

different from the risk in children from natural conceptions  , with the same absolute risk of 3 per
1000 births. Risk of publication
bias and small-study bias were undetected 

Risk of autism spectrum disorder
Six studies reported the risk of ASD.

One study [24] was excluded as it did not include children from natural conceptions as control. The risk of acquiring ASD in ART children is insignificantly different
with its risk in naturally conceived children

with identical absolute risk at 6 per 1000 births Risk of publication bias and small-study bias  were unidentified 
Behavioral problems
Risk of behavioral problems was reported in 2 studies
 and the results showed no differences in this
risk between ART and naturally conceived group 
 The absolute risk is 19 children per 1000 births

at ART group and 18 per 1000 births at naturally conceived group. Risk of bias and

small-study effects could not be estimated due to limited
studies 
Meta-analysis on the overall data showed that ART

children have a higher overall risk of neurodevelopmental disorders. Heterogeneity was identified for the
overall studies, and this might be due to cofounder ef-
fects. The overall studies showed no risk of publication

bias  and no small-study bias
 The absolute risk effect showed no increase in

number of children born with neurodevelopmental dis-
orders with a baseline population risk of 3 per 1000

births .
ICSI vs conventional 
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy in children from ICSI and
conventional IVF was reported in 2 studies 

procedure causes no increase in the prevalence of cere-
bral palsy compared to conventional 
ICSI
group, while IVF population risk is 4 per 1000 births
. The risk of bias statistic and

small-study effects could not be estimated
Risk of intellectual disability
Prevalence of intellectual disability was reported in 3 studies An increased risk of intellectual disability was identified in the ICSI group compared to

conventional IVF , with absolute risk at
ICSI group is 5 per 1000 births, while in IVF group is 3 per 1000 births . No risk of publication bias  and small study bias
Risk of autism spectrum disorder
The number of children diagnosed with ASD was reported in 2 studies . There is an increased risk of

ASD in children born after ICSI procedure compared to
conventional IVF , with an absolute risk effect of 1 more children per 1000 births compared to IVF

population risk of 2 per 1000 births). The risk of bias statistic and small-study effects could
not be calculated
The overall evaluation showed higher prevalence of
neurodevelopmental disorders in children from ICSI
compared to children from conventional IVF
Frozen vs fresh embryo transfer (6 studies)
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy was reported in 3 studies

. Risk of cerebral palsy in children from fro-
zen embryo transfer was similar to fresh embryo transfer
, with an absolute risk of 64 children in fro-
zen group and 66 children in fresh group per 1000 births

or 2 less children at risk compared to fresh group . The high number of children at risk
Overall analysis showed that the children from frozen

embryo transfer do not develop higher risk of neurodevelopmental disorders compared to children from fresh

embryo transfer . The risk of neurodevelopmental disorder in children from frozen embryos is at 14 per 1000

births while in fresh embryos was 16 per 1000 births

Additionally, potential cofounders to the results were also
evaluated. Two cofounders’ effects were confirmed by
meta-analysis, including preterm birth and low birth body

weight. The results showed that the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders is higher in children with history of preterm birth  with the absolute risk is 6

more children born with neurodevelopmental disorders in every 1000 births 
Meanwhile, the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in children with history of low birth body weight
 is also higher compared to
children without any history of low birth body weight
, with the absolute risk is 6

more children born with neurodevelopmental disor-
ders in every 1000 births .

ART procedures have the potentials to cause higher
rates of multiple birth

To our knowledge, a meta-analysis on the neurodevelopmental outcomes in children from ART has never been

performed. This study aimed to make consensual conclusions from all studies that investigated the neurodevelopmental outcomes in children from ART, including

ICSI, conventional IVF, frozen embryo transfer, and

fresh embryo transfer. The results of this study are expected to provide the reliable information for the patients and healthcare workers to consider before starting

As seen in Fig. 2, without taking specific details of the
ART treatments into account, the results show that ART
children develop an increased risk of cerebral palsy, but
not intellectual disability, ASD, or behavioral problems.
Cerebral palsy is a permanent neurological disorder
characterized with disability to coordinate muscle tones
and movements. This condition is caused by the damage

or dysgenesis of brain part(s) that are involved in the coordination and movements of the body. It has been consensually accepted that the common risk factors for

cerebral palsy are preterm birth and low birth body
weight [31, 32]. In our study, we could confirm that
these are the most likely risk factors that were presented
among children from ART with cerebral palsy  The ART procedures are associated with higher preterm birth and low birth body
weight, as they are also related to higher rates of

multiple birth. ART procedures could cause monozygotic twinning related to zona pellucida manipulation

and extended in vitro culture. Moreover, double embryo transfers during IVF procedures resulted in

higher chance of multiple pregnancy . Since the
pathogenesis of cerebral palsy could be initiated with

insults during gestation or after delivery, we could
not conclude if the pathogenesis of cerebral palsy
among ART children is due to the respiratory distress
that is caused by immature lungs, which eventually

lead to cerebral hypoxia after birth, or as a consequence of dysgenesis of part(s) of the brain that is re-
lated to movements and coordination. Nonetheless, these findings revealed the importance of optimum
prenatal and neonatal care for ART children.

Interestingly, when the neurodevelopmental out comes in children from ICSI were compared to the

outcomes in children from conventional IVF, increased risks of intellectual disability and ASD were

identified in the ICSI group. It is widely known that
in some cases, intellectual disability and cerebral palsy
are overlapping clinical conditions [34]. However, as
the differences in the prevalence of cerebral palsy in

children from ICSI and conventional IVF are statisti-
cally insignificant, we speculate that in these cases, in tellectual disability is more likely due to inert

factor(s), such as genetics. Furthermore, ASD has
been associated with numerous genetic disorders, and

has never been indicated as a result of neonatal in sults. Thus, we argue that the cause of higher risks of

intellectual disability and ASD in children from ICSI
is genetic related.
As we know, ICSI is intended to prevent fertilization

failure. One of the indications that becomes practi tioners’ common consideration when suggesting ICSI is

sperm immotility . Despite successes of achieving

pregnancies after ICSI using immotile or morphologic-
ally abnormal spermatozoa , reports have suggested that the rates of DNA fragmentation in immotile

spermatozoa are higher than in normal spermatozoa

[40]. Furthermore, poor-quality oocytes, advanced maternal age, and unexplained infertility have also been

used as indications to perform ICSI  Each of the
previously mentioned indication has also been associated
with higher rates of DNA fragmentation; hence, this
might be related to neurodevelopmental disorders. Study

by Porokhovnik et al. correlates infantile autism with elevated DNA damage degree [41]; thus, our findings

might be related to any of these factors.
As cryopreservation became more integrated to the

common ART practice nowadays, the comparison between children from frozen embryo transfer with children from fresh embryo transfer was also performed.

As previous reports have suggested, the risk of ac-
quiring DNA fragmentations during cryopreservation

and thawing processes might be associated with re-
duced numbers and proportion of trophectoderm cells , higher prevalence of neurodevelopmental disorders in children from frozen embryo transfer is expected. To our surprise, the meta-analysis results
showed that there are no significant differences between the risks of neurodevelopmental disorders in

children from frozen embryo transfer compared to the risk in children from fresh embryo transfer. Previous studies also reported that frozen embryo transfer

resulted in increased live birth rate and higher neo-
natal birth body weight . The improvement of

cryopreservation techniques, such as vitrification and
elective frozen embryo transfer, might result in better
pregnancy and neonatal outcome

The present study has several limitations. First, the num-
ber of studies that reported neurodevelopmental out-
comes from different ART procedures is limited. This
limitation correlates with the limited number of patients
and the possibilities that some of the findings might be
population specific. Secondly, singleton and multiple
births could not be differentiated in some studies. Previ-
ous studies suggested that multiple pregnancy carries
higher risks of prematurity and low birth body weight
, both could potentially contribute to the risks of
neurodevelopmental disorders  Third, the
matched case-control studies could introduce potential
conclusion bias on the absolute number of children at
risk in the normal population. To overcome all of these
limitations, future studies that involve larger populations
with sufficient background information are required.

In conclusion, children from ART have a higher risk of acquiring cerebral palsy than children from natural conceptions. This increased risk is possibly associated with
confounding factors, including preterm birth and low
body birth weight. Based on this finding, it is reasonable
to perform deliveries of children from ART at facilities
with available neonatal intensive care unit (NICU); thus,
treatment of potential cerebral insults after birth can be
optimized. Furthermore, children from ICSI carry higher
risks of intellectual disability and ASD than children

from conventional IVF. These findings suggest the importance of long-term follow-up and preimplantation
genetic screening, particularly in fertilizations by ICSI.
Lastly, cryopreservation and thawing of embryos did not seem to cause increases in any risks of neurodevelop-
mental disorders; therefore, freeze-all strategy seemed plausible.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), or autism, are general terms

for a complex series of developmental disability disorders char acterized by impaired communication, lack of awareness, social
interaction problems, and restricted behavior. ASD manifests in functional deficits, relations and work achievement that last a lifetime . The global prevalence of ASD has been estimated to be one in 132 persons (Baxter et al., 2015), while in the
US one in 68 eight year old children are thought to be affected
. The prevalence rates of autism have been shown to vary by region , and although differences in diagnosis may contribute to these discrepancies, findings
from epidemiological studies suggest that environmental factors
may play a role . Air pollution has been linked to a number of different health
conditions. Previous studies point to a plausible biological pathway linked to autism, wherein components of air pollution cause a systematic inflammatory response that can contribute to neuronal
injury and affect the development of the central nervous system
.A number of recently conducted epidemiological studies provide further support that traffic-related air pollution  adversely affects neurodevelopmental
effects . The investigation of environmental exposures during perinatal and
postnatal stage, through a child's first year of life is essential since these are the periods of brain development during which an environmental chemical insult can perturb neurodevelopment . Exposure to air pollution
represents an important exposure to consider in the etiology of autism, particularly given its ubiquitous nature and the potential
at both a population, and individual-level to modify exposure.
Air pollution is a heterogeneous mixture of gases and particulate matter. Nitrogen dioxide  has been associated with a
variety of health endpoints, and given its strong correlation with
roadways it is often used as a surrogate measure of TRAP. Among
air pollution components, particulate matter  has been seen
as a major widespread threat and has been heavily implicated in disease. While traffic is an important contributor to ambient PM concentrations, other sources include industrial emissions, secondary aerosols and even
domestic heating .  include components of various sizes: PM10, which consists of particles with a median
aerodynamic diameter of less than 10 mm in diameter, and fine particulate PM2.5 whose particles have median aerodynamic diameters of less than 2.5 mm, and are included within the larger
Herein, we present the results of a meta-analysis that investigated the associations between ambient air pollution and the development of autism. To inform on possible pathways, we felt it
necessary to examine associations based on periods of exposures. As such, our review focussed on studies that could inform on the
temporal sequence between exposure and outcome. Therefore, we prioritized our identification of relevant studies to include longitudinal and case-control designs. While some cross-sectional
studies have examined similar associations, these studies are limited in drawing causal inferences due to the inability to characterize associations temporally.
We undertook a search in the Cochrane Database of systematic reviews prior to the study to determine whether a previous systematic review had been done on this topic, and did not identify
One team member (Flores-Pajot) proceeded to conduct the systematic review. Initially, we intended to study the impacts of the environment, urban greenness and air pollution on the development of childhood autism and based on this aim 396 articles
were found. The search was then restricted to include only those
studies that looked at associations between three air pollutants
(NO2, Ozone and PM) and ASD. This restriction was made because
these represent three major air pollutants that have been most
commonly studied in relation to human health outcomes. Studies

were identified through PubMed, Web of Science, and Environmental Index databases using a specific search criteria, with boo-
lean operators AND in combination with search terms including:

Similar combinations using the terms above . Citation lists from these initial articles were also ex-
amined. Papers had to be written in English, French or Spanish,

before March 30th, 2016. The search yielded a total of 142 articles.
Abstracts of articles were retrieved and examined if they were
relevant epidemiological studies and  involving NO2, O3 or
PM, which reduced the number to 26 articles. The search was then
narrowed to only consider observational studies and then limited
to only keep those epidemiological studies that were looking at
NO2, O3 or PM and ASD for the systematic review, and that were
either a case-control or cohort design for the meta-analysis. We

excluded cross-sectional and ecological studies due to their limitations to inform on potential causal association. The combined

search strategy outlined above produced 13 studies that were included in the systematic review, from those only one study did not

provide the necessary quantitative data to be included in the

meta-analysis, and from the 12 studies included in the metaanalysis one comprised six population-based cohorts 

To assess the overall quality and potential for bias of the casecontrol and cohort studies, we used the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale
). This scale was originally developed to evaluate quality of nonrandomized studies in order to support and strengthen the
interpretation of meta-analytic results . The
NOS is a nine-point scale that assigns points on the basis of the
Statistical analysis
Epidemiological studies that have investigated O3 and NO2, two
gaseous pollutants, typically have measured exposure in parts per
billion , parts per million or μg/m3

the measures of association reported in the studies were converted to correspond to an increase in the incidence of autism
according to a 10 ppb exposure in gaseous pollutants, using a
conversion factors of 10 μg/m31⁄45.32 ppb for NO2 which is based
on ambient pressure of 1 atm and a temperature of 25 °C , and 10 μg/m3 for particulate matter.
Since ASD is a relatively rare condition, within this paper we
used the odds ratio extracted from several of these studies as an

approximation of risk ratio disease. For the remainder of the papers, and in our tables, we describe the associations between air

pollution and ASD using the risk ratio.
STATA software  was used to conduct the meta-analysis

of continuous data using inverse-variance weighting. Risk estimates that were adjusted for covariates from the previous studies

were chosen for this review. A random effects model was used for
the meta-analysis and include an I2 value to estimate the percent
of the total variance attributable to between studies inconsistency

(DerSimonian and Laird, 1986). Forest and funnel plots were produced to provide a visual representation of the distribution of
study specific effect estimates, to display the spread of risk estimates across studies, as well as to depict the pooled estimates of risk.
3. Results
3.1. Studies included
Three studies were identified that met the initial inclusion
criteria through PubMed, one additional study through Web of
Science two through Environment Index , one study through article refer-
ences and discussion among co-authors, and one

additional study was suggested through the initial peer-review
process to be included due to it's relevance. This last one contains
six population-based cohort within the same study and provides
the data needed to produce meta-estimates using each individual
cohort study .
Table 1 summarizes the seven cohort studies that investigated
NO2, O3 or PM and autism that were included in the meta-analysis,
while Table 2 describes the characteristics of the six case-control
studies. The tables report the main measure of association of individual exposures to PM2.5, PM10, NO2 and O3. The cohort study of

Swedish twins by  met all the inclusion criteria

but could not be included in our meta-analysis as it did not provide sufficient details on the concentration levels of the pollutants

that were studied. The final dataset used in our meta-analysis
included seven publications that represent 12 different studies
that satisfied all inclusion criteria

The studies that formed the basis of the meta-analysis employed different strategies to characterize exposure to air pollution. The most common techniques were land use regression (LUR)

and dispersion modeling . Volk et al. used two dif-
ferent exposure methods, line-source air quality dispersion and

regional air quality data (fixed site monitors) within 50 km of residence. Exposure estimates from regional air quality data was

used in the meta-analysis and forest plots because of the non linear association with dispersion site monitors 

When available, seasonalized estimates were used for this
meta-analysis in order to take into account temporal variations in
air pollution concentrations.
Each study considered the possible confounding influence for a
number of risk factors. Most studies accounted for the following
risk factors: age of child, sex, maternal age, maternal place of birth,
maternal education, race/ethnicity, parental education, type of
birth, parity, gestational weeks at birth, socio-economic status or

income, and smoking in pregnancy. Table 3 summarizes the different methods used to characterize exposure among study par-
ticipants, and provides a listing of the risk factors that were considered in each study.

 Entire pregnancy. Eight different studies explored the associations between ASD and exposure to NO2, O3, PM2.5 or PM10

during the prenatal period (Fig. 2). The summary risk meta-estimate of autism in relation to a 10 mg/m3 increase in PM2.5 was 1.34

(95% CI: 0.83, 2.17). There was substantial heterogeneity in this risk

estimate across the 8 studies (po0.0001). The summary risk estimates for a 10 mg/m3 increase in PM10 and a 10 ppb increase in

NO2 were 1.03 respectively. There was a statistical significant association between
exposure to ozone during pregnancy and autism with a 10 ppb
increase producing a risk ratio of 1.05.

 Trimester-specific. The forest plots generated from meta-analyses of the associations between autism and ambient . Exposure to PM2.5 was positively associated with autism in each

of the three trimesters though the strength of the association was
stronger in each successive trimester. Specifically, the risk ratios in
relation to a 10 mg/m3 increase across the three trimesters were
1.10, 1.21 and 1.33. In contrast, there was little difference in the
strength of the association across the three trimesters for NO2 as
the risk ratios per 10 pbb increase ranged between 1.15 and 1.18.
3.2.2. Postnatal period
From the studies looking at exposure to NO2, O3, PM2.5 or PM10
during the first year of postnatal period , or 1–4 years before ASD diagnosis for Jung et al.
paper, two
pollutants were found to be strongly associated with higher risk of
ASD. The pooled estimate of the relative risk in relation to a 10 mg/
m3 increase in PM2.5 was 2.43 . The corresponding relative risk for a 10 ppb increase in NO2 was 2.72
(95%CI: 1.04, 7.07) . Exposures to PM10 during the first
year of birth did not show a significant association with ASD.
3.3. Quality assessment

Different funnel plots were created, looking at exposure to individual pollutants during a specific time, to explore the possibility

of publication bias. In the absence of publication bias, it is presumed that the largest studies will be plotted in a funnel plot near

the mean, and smaller studies will be spread evenly on both sides
of the mean, creating a roughly funnel-shaped distribution . The funnel plots of studies looking at the exposure to
PM2.5 during the first trimester of pregnancy show a visually
asymmetrical distribution, supporting the possibility that there
has been publication bias . These results are similar to the
funnel plots of the eight studies looking at exposure to PM2.5
during the entire pregnancy , yet this later funnel plot has a
relatively symmetric distribution at the top of the funnel, and only
two smaller null studies at the bottom left, but we cannot rule out
publication bias. The capacity to detect bias with funnel plots is
limited due to the very small number of studies and the capacity to
identify symmetry, therefore the results should be treated with
caution.
4. Discussion
This paper provides a systematic review and meta-analysis that

summarizes findings from epidemiological studies on the association between ambient air pollution and ASD. Overall, the as-
sociations were largely positive though many of the summary

measures were not statistically significant which is largely influenced by the relatively small number of studies. The strength of
the associations observed between exposure to PM2.5 during the
prenatal period and autism is similar to that found for health
endpoints such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes, for which
air pollution is a more established risk factor. Our meta-estimates
of risk were even stronger for exposure to air pollution during the
last trimester of pregnancy and after birth, though these findings

are tenuous given the very small number of studies that investigated these exposures during this time window. Nonetheless,

these findings are consistent with the observations that it is during
this time interval that the human brain undergoes the most critical
development and is most vulnerable to environmental factors
during this period .
We also observed positive associations between O3 exposures

during the prenatal period and ASD. Animal studies have suggested that specific O3 exposure during gestation may subtly cause

adverse neurobehavioral effects after birth (Petruzzi et al., 1995;
Sorace et al., 2001). It is important to note that ozone is highly
variable across the seasons particularly in regions with extreme

weather changes . Hence, the characterization of the association between prenatal exposure to O3

and autism in these regions should account for the month of birth.
The studies by Becerra et al. and Volk et al.  were
both conducted in California which does experience higher ozone
levels during the summer, however differences in concentration
levels across seasons are not as large as in more northern cities.

Overall, there was little difference in the strength of the association between PM2.5 and autism between exposures over the

entire pregnancy , and those exposures during the third
trimester . The risk was slightly attenuated for the early
part of the pregnancy. We found a similar trend between autism
risk and increasing gestational age with PM10. There are two possible reasons that could explain stronger associations between

air pollution and autism with exposure occurring in the last trimester. The first explanation relates to the theory that this is a

more vulnerable period. As described by Rice and Barone Jr 

the later trimester of pregnancy represents a period where synapse formation, and neurotransmitter receptors formation are

under development. This in turn may impact neuronal connectivity thereby perturbing signaling pathways which some have

been implicated in the development of autism. Alternatively, previous work suggests that healthy brain development is dependent on the
functioning of the immune system. As it is well recognized that air
pollution impacts a number of immune functions such as oxidative
stress, this represents another pathway by which exposure to fine
particulate matter late in pregnancy may increase the risk of
autism. Previous epidemiological studies have suggested stronger

association between PM2.5 and some adverse birth outcomes including low birth weight with exposures occurring during the

third trimester .
Apart from the third trimester representing a more biologically
relevant period of exposure, stronger associations may be evident

as a result of exposure misclassification. Many of the studies included in this meta-analysis that looked at differences in risk by

trimester, relied on the place of residence at the time of birth
. However, the study
by Volk et al.  has the desired feature of capturing changes
in place of residence beginning three months before conception.
As such, it was better positioned to evaluate differences in risk
across trimesters. Volk et al. employed two distinct exposure

strategies, one that relied on a dispersion model, the other on
spatially interpolated fixed site monitoring. They found stronger
associations between exposures in the third trimester and autism
when compared to other periods of exposure when the former

method was used, but not with the latter. Given the lack of con-
sistency, and the few studies that have examined differences in

risk across trimester, more studies that fully account for residential
mobility are needed to better understand trimester-specific risks.
It is important to recognize that the approaches assigning air
pollution exposure to study participants use area-level measures
to infer individual-level exposure. Land-use regression methods
and dispersion models, which are the most common measures of
exposures used in the articles, have been proven successful for
monitoring annual mean concentration of air pollutants over a

specific study area, however small scale spatial variation still remains (Hoek et al., 2008). It is important to note that some pol-
lutants, such as NO2, exhibit greater spatial resolution within urban areas when compared to PM2.5, which is influenced to a

greater extent by long-range transportation of pollution. Approaches to exposure modeling that are able to partition local

versus distal sources of pollution are ultimately needed to better
understand how to mitigate air pollution concentrations so as to
reduce human health risks for multiple conditions, including
autism.
Interestingly, a recent commentary on whether the association

between air pollution and autism is casual or explained by confounding, contends that examining ambient air pollution concentration as a proxy for personal exposure helps avoid exposure

misclassification biases that could stem from differences in
personal behavior. As highlighted by
Weisskopf et al., confounding may be minimized because while
changes in individual behaviors over the course of a pregnancy
would impact personal exposures, there would be no such impact
for ambient exposures that are based on larger areas. Nonetheless,
it is important to recognize that some pollutants, such as NO2, are
more spatially variable within urban areas than others. Ultimately,
if the association between air pollution and autism is causal,
models that are able to differentiate between local and distal
sources of air pollution are needed to develop strategies that can

mitigate health risks. To date, few studies have employed different
exposure measurement strategies that can shed light on this issue.
One exception is the study by Volk et al. (2013) who found that
regionally based measures of air pollution produced somewhat

different measures of association when compared to those generated from the application of a dispersion model. Namely the

strength of the association was stronger, and non-linear for the
dispersion model when compared to the regional based measures
of air pollution.
Our forest plots revealed substantial heterogeneity in the risk
estimates. While this is undoubtedly due to differences in study
design, characteristics of participants, and possible biases unique
to each study, differences in the composition of the air pollution
likely contributed to variation in risk. The studies included in the

meta-analyses were undertaken in multiple countries with distinct meteorological features, and pollution mixtures. In terms of

the specific sources of pollutions, three identified that the sources
of the pollutants were specifically related to traffic. Some of the other
studies highlighted contributions from space heating (Guxens
et al., 2015), wood smoke and power plants 

Unlike studies of air pollution and several other chronic diseases, ascertainment of ASD is more challenging, as the diagnosis

of autisms is more complicated. The case definition on all studies
was based on validated instruments, meeting diagnostic criteria
and/or parental reports; yet two studies used screening tests for a
boarder range of behavioral disorders . All tests

are valid tools for assessment of children's behavior in epidemiological studies. Diagnostic issues could be
problematic if bias is implied, for example if people in urban areas
are more likely to use specialists that correctly diagnose autism
compared to people who live in rural areas, this would contribute
to a positive association between air pollution and ASD. However,
some of the studies used different cut points for identifying autism
(ex: clinical range of autism versus autistic traits in Guxens et al.
(2015)) and the results did not substantially change. As highlighted
by Weisskopf et al. (2015), differential ascertainment of autism by
socio-demographic status may also introduce some bias, as those
of lower socio-economic status (SES) may be more prone to live in
areas of higher air pollution. Most studies in the meta-analysis
included some adjustment for SES. Others performed a stratified
analysis to evaluate whether SES modified associations between
air pollution concentrations and autism. Of note was the finding by
Becerra et al. (2013) who discovered that LUR-based associations
were strongest for children of mothers with less than a high school
education.
Concentration of many air pollutants, including diesel exhaust
and PM, are increased near freeway and other major roads; these

pollutants have been shown to affect the brain function and ac-
tivity in toxicological studies (Hougaard et al., 2008; Ntziachristos

et al., 2007; Perera et al., 2006). To our knowledge, a study of 304

autism cases and 259 typically developing controls based in California is the only one to date to investigate the association between childhood autism and proximity to a freeway. Volk et al.

(2011) found living within 309 m from freeway during pregnancy
to be positively associated with ASD. A British cross-sectional

study of 2713 individuals compared the prevalence of mental illness, ASD, and behavioral disorder in people living in urban areas

with those living in rural areas, and exposure to pollution and

noise was one of the suggested hypotheses to explain a relationship between mental ill health and urbanization. This study found

that ASD was more common in people living in rural areas. A proposed explanation for this is that there has been a development of higher numbers of specialist residential placements in the
county to accommodate people with ASD . The
relationship between urbanization and mental health is an interesting topic worth exploring. More studies should use distance to
roadways, volume of vehicles or urbanization as markers of exposure to traffic, in order to provide a better understanding of the
association of ASD with traffic-related air pollutants.
The studies included in this systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted in diverse settings that capture varied exposure to air pollution. They also differ with respect to the methods used to characterize pollution levels, and the ability to
account for the influence of other possible risk factors. Despite the
relatively small number of studies conducted to date, the findings
from these studies provide compelling support for the hypothesis
that prenatal exposure to PM2.5 and O3 and postnatal exposure to
PM2.5 and NO2 increases the risk of ASD.
Some recommendations for future studies to improve our understanding on the relationship between air pollution and ASD

include: 
 increasing study size to increase power to detect
smaller associations,tracking residential mobility during
pregnancy to account for changes in exposure during this critical

time-period,  incorporating methods to characterize air pollu tion at both a local, and a regional level.
Autism spectrum disorder is a complex developmental disorder characterized by impairments in social interactions and communi-
cation and the presence of restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped patterns of behaviors. It is
associated with lifetime social and emotional hardship for children and their families , as well as economic burdens on families and society . The estimated prevalence of ASD in the United States increased from 0.66%
in 2002 to 1.85% in 2016 , which is only partly explained by more widespread screening of children and an expanded definition of ASD
since 2008 to include more mild cases ASD can be diagnosed starting around age 2, but subtle social and communication impairment may be present
earlier , suggesting determinants occur in utero or in early life. Although studies have shown a substantial heritability in ASD, environmental factors are likely to play an important role in causation.
In the last decade, many studies have examined associations between ASD and early-life exposure to ambient air pollutants , the near roadway air pollution mixture, and, in the U.S., air toxics derived
from the National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment. However, results were not uniformly consistent. For example, several studies in the United States showed that prenatal exposure to PM2.5 was associated with increased risk of ASD . In contrast, studies conducted in Europe have reported no association. Some studies of air toxics have found metals , aromatic solvents, and chlorinated
solvents to be associated with a higher risk of autism, but these findings also have not been consistent.
Three high-quality systematic reviews and meta-analyses described these inconsistencies and proposed some plausible explanations for differences between studies, including different levels of air pollutant
exposures, diverse ASD ascertainment methods, and different ASD phenotypes . However, none focused on possible differences in effects due to risk or protective factors that may have increased or decreased the
susceptibility of some populations. ASD likely has a multifactorial etiology, and in recent years a “second hit”
hypothesis that exposures such as air pollution would require additional
risk factor(s) to cause disease has been proposed . Thus, susceptibility to air pollution might occur
in children with other risk factors for ASD, such as male sex; maternal
infections, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and other maternal inflam-
matory conditions, so-called “maternal immune activators”; in children of
mothers with low nutritional intake of folic acid ,
medication for neuro- or neuropsychological disorders; or in children from marginalized communities with low
socioeconomic status . Child’s Genotypic
variation increasing susceptibility to air pollution may help identify
biological pathways .Synergistic associations of other risk factors could markedly increase
the attributable burden of air pollution in concert with these other exposures. In addition, understanding patterns of susceptibility can help
identify sensitive subpopulations that may benefit most from air pollution emission controls. The Clean Air Act in the United States requires
that the regulatory standard protects everybody, including the most vulnerable, from adverse impacts of air pollution . Exposure reductions can also reduce environmental health disparities
, as low socioeconomic status  communities often
experience greater air pollution exposure and larger effects for some
outcomes. The purpose of this review was to examine how ASD susceptibility to air pollution has varied among vulnerable subpopulations in studies to
date. We identified knowledge gaps in our understanding of ASD susceptibility to air pollution and suggest possible approaches for future
studies to address these gaps.
This review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses  checklist . To
be included in this review, a study met the following criteria:  It was
published in a peer-reviewed journal;  The exposure was ambient
criteria  air pollution or airborne toxics, thus, indoor airborne
chemical and second-hand smoking exposures were not included;  The
health outcome was ASD or related sub-phenotypes, It was empirical,
which excluded reviews, comments, replies, protocols, conceptual
studies, and letters to the editor;  The study was in humans, thus,
animal studies were not included;  The study was published in English;
and  Effect modification was evaluated in stratified analyses or in interactions.
We identified articles published in peer-reviewed journals from
PubMed and Embase database. The database search was conducted on
May 1st, 2021. The search keywords were a combination of terms for
exposures and health outcomes. For exposures, The search syntaxes for the two da-
tabases were shown in Supplementary Table S1 and Table S2. We also reviewed references cited in eligible studies to identify additional articles for inclusion; no additional eligible publications were added from 
The study selection was conducted in two steps. Step 1 involved
screening titles and abstracts to identify human studies of ambient air
pollution and ASD. Studies were identified sequentially according to the
first six eligibility criteria . If a study failed to meet an
eligibility criterion, there was no further review of other inclusion
criteria. For Step 2, full-text was reviewed to select articles reporting
effect modification or interactions of air pollution with other factors in
association with ASD. In this step, all 7 inclusion criteria were evaluated.
Because there were few studies with comparable exposures and effect
modifiers, we did not conduct a meta-analysis.
Two major categories of data were extracted from studies selected.
The first included study characteristics including year, study design,
study population, sample size, exposure measurement, outcome ascertainment, modifiers, and covariates. The second focused on effect sizes
for effect modification. For stratified analyses, the estimated effect size
and corresponding confidence interval from each modifying category
were recorded. When interactions were tested, results of additive and
multiplicative tests were also extracted.
For each study, the assessment of risk of bias was based on the nine point Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale. For case-control studies, the scale consists of three evaluation
sections corresponding to the possibility of bias in selection of cases
and controls  comparability of cases and controls and
treatment of confounders on the basis of study design or data analysis , and  the quality and completeness of exposure assessment . For cohort studies, the three sections correspond to (a) the
assessment of possible bias in the selection of both exposed and nonexposed participants ,  the comparability between
exposed and nonexposed participants and treatment of confounders on
the basis of study design or data analysis , and (the evaluation of potential bias in assessment of the outcome and in follow-up . A higher score represents a higher quality of study. A common
cut-off score for an acceptable quality study 
Additionally, we assessed the risk of bias for each study according to
the qualitative guidelines developed by Lam et al. These
guidelines are based on the GRADE principles . Five
items from the guidelines were applicable for this study, including the
source population representativeness, the misclassification of exposures
and outcomes, the comprehensiveness of potential confounders, and the
selective reporting of results. We added an evaluation of misclassification of effect modifiers , using similar rules to those for
misclassification of pollution exposure. Each item was rated with 4 risk
levels .  Effect modifiers evaluated based on the literature review included
 child’s sex, (2) markers for socioeconomic status,  maternal factors (nutrition, maternal immune activa-
tors, such as diabetes), and (4) genetics. We summarized the results of
effect modification from each study.
Additive or multiplicative interaction effects between the modifier
and air pollution exposure were reported, if available. For studies that
showed only results from stratified analyses by susceptibility factors,
evaluation of effect modification was based on comparison of each
subgroup’s effect size, as described by Altman and Bland . We calculated the original coefficients and standard errors from the reported odd ratios or hazard ratios and corresponding 95% confidence
intervals reported in most studies. The difference between the original
regression coefficients was assessed with the Wald test using the pooled
Studies identified and then excluded at each step of selection are
shown in the PRISMA flow chart. A total of 1272 publications  were identified through
the database search, of which 296 were duplicates. The remaining 976
articles were screened by title and abstract and 937 publications that
were not empirical human studies on the association between air

pollution and ASD were excluded. A total of 39 articles studied the association between ambient air pollution and ASD were identified. In the

full-text assessment, another 20 studies were excluded because they did
not examine any effect modifiers . A total of 19 publications were included in this review.
A description of the 19 included studies is shown in Supplementary
Table S6. All studies that evaluated effect modification were published
since 2010. The majority (N = 15) were conducted in the United States,
including 7 based on populations in California. There were four studies
from other countries, one each from Sweden, Israel, Denmark, and
Canada. Studies from other countries were not included because they
did not examine effect modifiers. There were 13 case-control studies, 4
cohort studies and 2 ecological studies. The most widely examined air
pollutant was particulate matter (PM); 11 publications studied the effect
of PM2.5 and 10 studied PM10. Nitrogen oxides  were
examined in 12 articles, ozone ) in 6 studies, sulfur dioxide (SO2) in 1
study, and carbon monoxide in 1 study. Nine studies examined

more than one regulated air pollutant. In addition, three studies exam-
ined effects of the near-roadway air pollution mixture, and 5 examined

effects of airborne toxicants. Except for two ecological studies, all
studies examined exposure during pregnancy (N = 17) and 10 of these
assessed trimester-specific effects. Five studies assessed pre-pregnancy
effects, and 7 examined effects of postnatal exposure. Methods for

ASD ascertainment were varied, including detailed clinical and neuro-
psychological evaluations, extraction from electronic medical records,

and questionnaire surveys. Six studies further divided ASD into subphenotypes based on comorbidities.
Both the NOS and the navigation guide from Lam et al. (2016) provided criteria for assessing bias in individual level observational studies.
Therefore, two ecological studies were excluded from the assessment of bias. NOS scores (the last
column of Supplementary Table S6) for all the 17 observational studies
with individual level data passed the cut-off score of 7 for acceptable
quality.
The assessment of risk of bias corresponding to the guide from Lam is
shown in Supplementary Table S7. Most studies were rated as “low” or
“probably low” on all 6 criteria for bias, with some exceptions. For
example, the source population representativeness had “probably high”
bias in Kalkbrenner et al. (2018), because the study population was
volunteers. Three studies of air toxics were rated as “probably high” risk
of exposure misclassification bias because this dataset has high uncer-
tainty in the exposure estimates .
Among the effect modifiers, the measure of folic acid intake in Goodrich
et al. (2018) had “probably high” bias, because the assessment of folic
acid intake was based on retrospective recall in a telephone interview.
The potential misclassification of urbanicity in Kalkbrenner et al. 
was classified as “probably high” because there was no description of
how the “urbanicity” modifier was defined or obtained.
A total of 11 papers (7 of regulated pollutants and 4 of air toxics)
examined effect modification by child’s sex; 3 examined modification by
maternal or family education level. Two studies assessed variation in air
pollution effects by neighborhood deprivation and one by urbanicity.
Effect modification by race and income were only evaluated in the two
ecological studies.
• Child’s sex:
Most studies reported that the effect estimates of early life exposures
to both PM10 and PM2.5 were stronger in boys than in girls 
Only Jo et al. (2019b)found that the hazard ratio in boys for the first
trimester average PM2.5 [ was statistically different from that in girls ;
p-interaction = 0.03. Larger but not significantly different PM2.5 effects
were observed in boys in the third trimester, for the entire pregnancy
average exposure, and during the first year of life.
ASD-associated sex interactions with other regulated pollutants were
not statistically significant (Table 1). One study found no association of
NO2 during pregnancy with ASD risk in girls [OR = 1.00 and a positive effect in boys , but
interaction was not significant (Pagalan et al., 2019). NO exposure
during pregnancy had a similar pattern of interactions with sex in the

same study. Another study found average NO2 exposure during preg-
nancy was associated with increased risk in girls but decreased risk in boys
and the difference in the effect estimates was significant (  One ecological study reported no significant effect modi-
fication by sex in the association between exposure to unhealthy air and ASD prevalence 
Four studies assessed the interaction of child’s sex with air toxics
exposure. More than 100 air toxics were studied. Therefore, we show
only those for which there were significant interactions . With exceptions of ethylidene dichloride and polyaromatic
hydrocarbons (von Ehrenstein et al., 2014), there was a consistent
pattern of larger air toxics effects sizes for boys than girls. Two studies
reported airborne lead to be a risk factor for ASD in boys but not in girls
. Other metals  and volatile organic compounds were
also reported as risk factors for ASD in boys not for girls 
Three studies (2 case-control and 1 ecological design) demonstrated
no consistent pattern of effect modification of the air pollution-ASD
association by education level  Becerra et al.  found

that the effect of traffic-related NO2 during pregnancy on ASD was statistically significantly higher in children whose mothers did not graduate from high school than in children whose mothers graduated high
school. However, in the same study, stronger associations of CO and NO2
exposure during pregnancy were observed in children with maternal
education level greater than high school compared with those with less
than high school, and these differences in point estimates were statistically significant. A Swedish study reported that associations of
traffic-related NOx and PM10 exposure during pregnancy and the first
year of life were stronger in the more educated subgroup, but neither main effects nor interactions
were statistically significant . An ecological study on
air toxics found that the association of mercury with ASD risk was
significantly higher in census tracts with below-average percentage of
college educated households .
Two case-control studies examined the modifying effect of neighborhood deprivation, based on an index including income, education,
unemployment and other socioeconomic characteristics in small socio-
economically homogeneous areas (Table 3). One U.S. study found that
children living in the mo during the first year
of life  . When modeling PM2.5 as a continuous variable,
the interaction between neighborhood deprivation level also was not
significant in the same study . In contrast, a Swedish study
found that traffic-related NOx and PM10 exposure during the first year of

life were more strongly associated with ASD in less deprived neighborhoods  Kalkbrenner et al.

(2010) reported that there were no modifying effects of census tract
urbanicity (100% rural, mixed, and 100% urban) on the association of
air toxics with ASD. Dickerson et al. (2016) found that children from
census tracts with higher poverty rates had stronger associations of a
combined metals index with ASD.
• Race
Racial differences in effects were examined in only one ecological
study, in which there was an association of ASD with unhealthy air
quality (AQI >100) only among Asians, which was not significant  after adjustment for confounders (Al-Hamdan et al., 2018).

Two studies reported effect modification by maternal factors . In a case-control study,
Goodrich et al. had stronger associations of ASD with NO2 than mothers with sufficient folic
acid intake 
Jo et al.  reported increased ASD risk associated with
first trimester O3 exposure among mothers with gestational diabetes
mellitus  diagnosed <24 weeks’ gestation  compared to mothers without dia-
betes. No O3 associations with ASD were observed among children of

mothers with later onset GDM or with pre-existing diabetes.
3.4.3. Genetic factors
Two studies of interactions with genetic factors were identified
(Table 5). Kim et al. examined 15 interactions between 3 types of
copy number variation (CNV) burden 
and 5 air p. Only interactions of O3 exposures during pregnancy with CNV duplication burden per increase of 1,356,513 base
pairs were significant. In another study, ASD risk
was increased in association with an interaction of exposure to high
PM10, NO2, and dispersion-modeled near-roadway pollution  with the MET receptor
tyrosine kinase rs1858830 CC genotype 
Since Windham et al. (2006) published the first study of the association between prenatal air toxics and the risk of ASD in 2006, more than

30 papers have examined air pollution-ASD association in diverse populations and regions. In the last decade, studies have begun to examine

susceptibility to air pollution. This approach has the potential to identify
susceptible populations and potentially to explain some inconsistency in

the main effects of air pollution. However, we found only limited evidence that male sex, low education, maternal folate deficiency and

gestational diabetes, and child’s copy number and MET receptor tyro-
sine kinase genotypic variation may increase risk of ASD associated with

air pollution. There were few studies that examined each susceptibility
characteristic, except sex of the child, and little consistency of findings
across studies.
4.1. Susceptibility by sex

The most widely examined effect modifier was child’s sex. In gen-
eral, epidemiological studies found stronger effects of early life PM2.5

and air toxics exposure on the risk of ASD in boys than girls. These
findings are consistent with toxicological studies showing that the
activation of microglial cells induced by neuroinflammation may lead to
synapse dysfunction involved in ASD (Bolton et al., 2017; Hammond
et al., 2018). Males may be more sensitive to PM or other inflammatory

insults because they have more microglia than females during gestational and early postnatal periods  An

alternative explanation is that higher prenatal testosterone levels during
fetal brain development activate microglia, making males more
vulnerable to air pollutants or other inflammatory insults (Auyeung
et al., 2013; McCarthy, 2016). In human studies, the small sample of
girls in many studies of air pollution and ASD limited ability to detect
small differences between effects in boys and girls. For example, one
study with 441 ASD cases in girls reported larger effect estimates in boys
In another study, a considerably larger PM2.5 effect in boys 
Sparse and inconsistent findings limit our ability to draw conclusions
about how SES modifies air pollution effects. For example, Becerra et al.
showed that the associations of NO2 with ASD were stronger for children
of mothers without high school degrees, but for CO stronger associations
were observed among children of better educated women. Reasons for
these findings are unclear. However, in general, larger effects among
lower educated mothers might be expected if low-educated mothers
were more likely to be at home (Cohn et al., 2014) and so residential
exposure estimates during pregnancy were more accurate. More
educated mothers may be more likely to work in indoor office jobs and
in buildings that filter ambient pollution and therefore have little
exposure. Highly educated mothers may be more likely to have diets
supplemented with folate or rich in antioxidants that could diminish the
effect of air pollution (Croft et al., 2018; Lim et al., 2019). One potential
explanation for why smaller effects of ambient air pollution might be

observed in children of less educated mothers comes from the cumulative risk model, based on a hypothesis that large effects of co-occurring

other relatively high adverse exposures or social stressors may result in
little additional risk from ambient air pollution (O’Neill et al., 2003).

One challenge in assessing effects of SES is that SES can have inde-
pendent effects at both the individual level and the area level (O’Neill

et al., 2003). Neighborhood SES markers such as average education,
income, employment, rates of poverty or home values in the census tract
have sometimes been found to more strongly modify effects of air
pollution on cardiovascular outcomes than individual level education,
occupation and income (Chi et al., 2016). According to the “double
jeopardy” conceptual model (O’Neill et al., 2003), in addition to the

generally greater concentrations of air pollution associated with
neighborhood SES, deprived neighborhoods may be lacking in features
such as healthy food availability and green space, contributing to a
higher risk of chronic conditions, such as diabetes and obesity, which
may increase susceptibility to ambient pollutants.
4.3. Susceptibility by maternal health conditions and nutrition intake
One study reported that increased ASD risk was associated with first
trimester O3 among mothers with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
diagnosed before 24 weeks’ gestation (Jo et al., 2019a). Diabetes is one
example of many conditions that cause maternal immune activation
(MIA), including viral and bacterial infections (Jiang et al., 2016; Zerbo
et al., 2013), asthma (L. A. Croen, Grether, Yoshida, Odouli and Van de
Water, 2005), and preeclampsia (Dachew et al., 2018) that have been
associated with higher risk of ASD. Common biological pathways of
effects of MIA, O3 and PM2.5 include systemic inflammation and
oxidative stress that are associated with increased reactive oxygen
species in the placenta and fetus (Bonini and Sargis, 2018; Brown et al.,

2001; Chen and Lippmann, 2009; Cuffe et al., 2017). Thus, it is biologically plausible to hypothesize that the presence of MIA during crit-
ical time windows may have synergistic effects with early-life air

pollution on ASD, a “second hit” resulting in disease (Bilbo et al., 2018;
Estes and McAllister, 2016). This hypothesis has the potential to identify
new approaches to prevention based either on treatment, for example
dietary approaches to reducing gestational diabetes, in addition to
regulation of pollutant levels. Parenthetically, in the United States,
regulated air pollutant exposure has been declining during the period of
increasing rates of ASD (Sullivan et al., 2018). Therefore, it is not
plausible that these air pollutant exposures alone are increasing the risk
of ASD. However, increasing prevalence of maternal characteristics such
as gestational diabetes that are known risk factors for ASD (Xiang et al.,
2015) have the potential to increase the fraction of ASD attributable to
air pollution even in the context of stable or decreasing regional
pollutant levels.
We acknowledge that some MIA triggers, such as diabetes, may also
be potential mediators in the association between air pollution and ASD.
One recent study found little evidence of mediation effects of maternal
immune biomarkers in the association between prenatal NO2 exposure
and ASD in children (Volk et al., 2020). However, the study did not
examine interactions. Future research might examine both mediating
and modifying roles of MIA in air pollution-associated ASD risk.
Because diet can be modified, dietary susceptibility to air pollution
effects could have major public health significance 
Sufficient folic acid and vitamin intake during pregnancy has been
associated with reduced ASD risks in children (Levine et al., 2018;

Schmidt, 2013; Schmidt et al., 2019). However, only one study exam-
ined the role of folic acid intake as a factor protecting against air

pollution effects on autism (Goodrich et al., 2018). The timing of the
largest protective effect of folic acid, during first trimester, suggests a
window of vulnerability to pollution. Epigenetic dysregulation caused
by air pollution is one pathway that may explain such effects (Lin et al.,
2016; Marsit, 2015). Antioxidants in maternal diets can reduce the
oxidative stress induced by air pollution (Block et al., 2012; Kannan
et al., 2006). Other nutritional factors including vitamin D (Stubbs et al.,
2016) and polyunsaturated fatty acids are also antioxidants and may
improve autism symptoms in children with ASD. These also merit investigation as potential modifiers of air
pollution effects.
. Genetic susceptibility to air pollution-associated ASD
There is substantial heritability in ASD (Tchaconas and Adesman,
2013; Tick et al., 2016). Hundreds of genes have been identified in
biological pathways that may contribute to ASD (Chaste and Leboyer,
2012; Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik and Nowakowska, 2019). However, we
identified only two studies that examined gene-environment interaction
(air pollution with CNVs and with MET CC genotype) on the risk of ASD.
CNV duplication and deletion burden increased the prenatal ozone
exposure association with ASD risk in children  A few
animal studies have provided evidence for ozone-induced oxidative
stress and autism-like behavior (Bignami et al., 1994; Block et al., 2012;
Sorace et al., 2001). In humans, oxidative stress is a key feature of the
ASD phenotype  It is possible that
CNVs contribute to genes altering reactive oxygen species. Thus, CNVs and prenatal air pollution exposure can
potentially share common biological pathways leading to ASD. Another
study found interactions of a specific functional polymorphism, MET
receptor tyrosine kinase rs1858830 CC genotype, with prenatal
near-roadway air pollution and regional PM2.5, PM10, and NO2. Genetic
studies have shown that children with MET CC genotype had decreased
expression of MET protein in brain, which is associated with ASD
. Animal experiments have
also shown that prenatal exposure to PAH  causes both decreased MET protein
expression in the brain and autism-like behavior in mouse offspring

. Therefore, it is plausible that decreased MET protein expression is a biological pathway common to air pollution exposures and ASD, and MET genotype may play a role in the air pollution

association with ASD. Future studies may investigate the interaction
between air pollution and ASD polygenic risk.
One reason for the paucity of research on the interaction between
genes and air pollution is that obtaining both genetic and environmental
data for the same study population is expensive and time consuming
(Kim et al., 2017). Opportunities exist for assigning early-life air Overall, most studies included in this review were rated as “low” or
“probably low” in risk of bias, especially for the relatively low bias in the
measurements of air pollution and of effect modifiers, lending credibility
to the effects observed. However, some limitations of these studies
emerged during the review.

Large sample size is required to observe interaction effects for rela-
tively uncommon diseases like ASD. Studies of air pollution-sex inter-
action generally did not identify statistically significant effects,

potentially due to the small proportion of ASD cases in girls reducing the
power to identify interactions. In the U.S., additional studies outside
California could make the results more representative. Future reviews
might also include studies of continuous measures of autistic traits,
which may allow for detection of subtle effect modification in smaller
sample sizes and reduce potential bias due to disparities in disease
diagnosis by sociodemographic characteristics.
The role of effect modification was usually not the main research
hypothesis for the studies reviewed; thus, the reported interactions may
reflect selective reporting bias. The absence of a standard approach to
reporting results of effect modification is another limitation. Some
studies only reported the results of stratified analyses. Others reported
the p-values of multiplicative interaction terms from statistical models.

Only a few articles assessed interaction on both the additive and multiplicative scale. Reporting risk measures (relative risks, odds ratios,

hazard ratios) for each stratum of exposure and the interaction on both

additive and multiplicative scales is good practice . The studies by Goodrich et al. and McGuinn et al.

 are examples of reporting additive and multiplicative in-
teractions. Finally, most studies do not explicitly describe the theoretical

or conceptual frameworks supporting the study hypothesis and design
for assessing effect modification.
4.6. Strengths and limitations of this review
To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review summarizing the
evidence on effect modifiers of the association between air pollution and

the risk of ASD. The review followed the PRISMA checklist. The literature search was based on two most widely used databases, PubMed and
Embase. The data extraction was thorough, including complementary
results reported in supplementary materials. Rigorous assessment of risk
of bias was conducted considering population representativeness, the
potential for misclassification of exposure, ASD outcome, effect modi-
fiers and the potential for selective reporting bias.
Because there were relatively few studies and results were not uni-
formly consistent, we did not attempt to conduct meta-analyses, and
there were few definitive conclusions that could be drawn about how the
association between air pollution and ASD was modified by the factors
studied. We only included peer-reviewed studies published in English. It
is possible that additional relevant information might be available in
book chapters, non-English and grey literature.
5. Conclusions
This review synthesized studies of potential effect modifiers of the
association between ambient air pollution and the risk of ASD. Maternal
gestational diabetes, insufficient folic acid intake during pregnancy, low
maternal education, child male sex and high CNV burden or MET
rs1858830 CC genotype may increase susceptibility to the effect of
prenatal air pollution exposure on ASD risk. However, the limited
number of studies on each modifier precludes definitive conclusions.
Additional investigation of these susceptibility characteristics would

benefit from consistent definitions across studies with sample sizes
sufficient to identify interactions and a priori hypotheses, for example
that exposure to maternal immune activators would increase effects of
air pollutants on ASD.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by
communication and interaction difficulties as well as repeated and stereotyped behaviors and
interests . Approximately 66 million individuals worldwide have ASD, and it has been reported to
begin early in life .
Although the exact cause of ASD is unknown, genetic factors are key contributors. Further,
various environmental factors are involved and are considered an important aspect of the increased
prevalence of ASD . Rapid industrialization and the consequent environmental pollution have
also increased the risk of exposure to toxic substances via various pathways. Since ASD occurs early in
life, studies have reported that toxic exposure, such as mercury poisoning in the prenatal or childhood
period, could cause ASD  Therefore, infant mercury poisoning caused by seafood consumption
by the mother, pediatric vaccination, and prenatal use of antibiotics has been suggested to cause
ASD . Moreover, studies have reported that pre-  and postnatal exposure to antibiotics and
acetaminophen increases the ASD risk
Although antibiotics are essential for treating some diseases, antibiotic exposure has been
associated with various diseases. Antibiotic use can cause abnormal changes in the human microbiome.
Studies have suggested that when the altered microbiome is passed onto the fetus, it increases the risk
of colitis and ASD by impeding neurological development . Further, antibiotic exposure
has been reported to be weakly associated with the risk for ASD ; however, this association
cannot be clearly established given the difficulty of measuring fetal antibiotic exposure. Studies have
also reported that postnatal antibiotic exposure is associated with ASD; specifically, postnatal use of
acetaminophen and antibiotics, as well as ear infection, were reported to increase the risk for ASD .
This indicates that despite continued studies on the association between ASD and antibiotics,
a definitive conclusion is yet to be reached. Particularly, the lack of consensus on pre- and postnatal
antibiotic exposure has hindered efforts toward determining this relationship. Therefore, we aimed
to conduct two-side meta-analyses to clearly determine the relationship between ASD and antibiotic
use as well as present foundational data for preventive and management strategies for lowering the
ASD risk.
Search Strategy and Selection Criteria
This meta-analysis was performed in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines and was
approved by the institutional review board of Gachon University .
We searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library databases for all relevant
studies written in English and published before February 2019. The search terms used were  andFor meta-analysis, we included studies that reported the association between ASD and
pre- or postnatal antibiotic exposure in childhood and excluded studies that did not report the
antibiotic exposure level as well as the ASD and control group. We included observational studies,
including case-control, cross-sectional, and cohort studies and excluded commentary, editorial, and
review articles.
All authors independently screened and selected relevant data, and any disagreements were
resolved by discussion. We extracted relevant data, including first author, publication year, study
design, country, sample size, age of participants, and related outcomes. Moreover, to assess the
association between ASD and pre- or postnatal antibiotic exposure in childhood, we extracted all
measurement data including prevalence data of patients with ASD and controls group as well as the
number and amount of pre- and postnatal antibiotic exposure. The risk estimates of ASD in antibiotic
exposure and the standardized mean difference  of antibiotic exposure in ASD were analyzed
via meta-analysis using the Comprehensive Meta-Analysis software version 3 . We assessed the heterogeneity using the Q statistic and I
model was applied in all analyses to address heterogeneity. Subgroup analyses were performed
based on group differences in prenatal and postnatal exposure. Publication bias was assessed using
funnel plots and Egger’s intercept. indicated a significant difference. Furthermore, for
quality assessment, we used the Newcastle Ottawa Scale to assess the methodological quality
of the nine included studies . The NOS is a representative tool developed for meta-analysis
of non-randomized comparative studies, including case-control, cross-sectional, and cohort studies.
It comprises an adjustment item with the selection of study groups, comparability of the groups, and
determination of either the exposure or outcome of interest to evaluate the quality of articles included
in the meta-analyses.
We initially identified 1877 studies , and after the elimination of duplicates using the
Endnote reference database, 1459 studies remained. We excluded 1348 articles based on the titles and
60 articles based on the abstract, and thus were left with 51 articles that were eligible for full-text
screening. After close review, 42 publications were excluded because of lack of usable data and failure
to meet the inclusion criteria. Finally, a total of nine articles were identified and included in the
meta-analysis. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the nine selected studies, which were published
between 2007 and 2019.  All studies were performed in the USA, Denmark, Italy, Lebanon, Canada, and Sweden. The age of the subjects
ranged from birth to 18 years. The outcomes of the nine studies were only described as related content
regarding ASD and antibiotic usage.
We initially identified 1877 studies , and after the elimination of duplicates using the
Endnote reference database, 1459 studies remained. We excluded 1348 articles based on the titles and
60 articles based on the abstract, and thus were left with 51 articles that were eligible for full-text
screening. After close review, 42 publications were excluded because of lack of usable data and failure
to meet the inclusion criteria. Finally, a total of nine articles were identified and included in the
meta-analysis. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the nine selected studies, which were published
between 2007 and 2019. The outcomes of the nine studies were only described as related content
regarding ASD and antibiotic usage. In addition, the quality scores ranged from 5 to 8.
Meta-Analysis Result Relating the ASD Risk in Antibiotic Exposure
To investigate the association between ASD and antibiotic exposure, the ASD risk was analyzed
based on the antibiotic exposure and control group. As shown in Figure 2A, meta-analysis results
indicated that early antibiotic exposure, including pre- and postnatal, significantly increased the
ASD risk in children ) with moderate heterogeneity

, the results of subgroup analyses showed that prenatal antibiotic
exposure significantly increased the ASD risk with
moderate heterogeneity Furthermore, as shown in Figure 2C, postnatal antibiotic
exposure significantly increased the ASD risk in children. Moderate heterogeneity was identified across all studies; therefore,
a random-effects model was performed. The funnel plots and Egger’s test  showed significant
results in seven of the included studies; however, in subgroup analyses, the results of the Egger’ tests
 were not significant, indicating no publication bias.
Meta-Analysis Results Related to Antibiotic Exposure in ASD
To assess the association between ASD and antibiotic exposure in children, we analyzed differences
in antibiotic exposure between the ASD and control groups. Meta-analysis results showed significantly
increased early antibiotic exposure, including pre- and postnatal, in children with ASD. Further, there was obvious heterogeneity in the included
studies therefore, we applied a random-effects model to the analysis. The funnel plots and
Egger’s test did not give significant results (p = 0.67), indicating no publication bias. In the subgroup
analyses, prenatal antibiotic exposure was significantly increased in children with ASD  with moderate heterogeneity . However, as shown
in Figure 3C, there was no significant difference in the postnatal antibiotic exposure between children
with ASD and controls. there was significant heterogeneity across all studies; therefore, a random-effects model was
performed. Furthermore, the funnel plots and Egger’s test performed for all studies did not show
statistical significance , indicating no
publication bias.
This study analyzed the relationship between ASD and early antibiotic use in children using
two-sided meta-analyses. Specifically, we analyzed the relationship between ASD and pre- and
postnatal antibiotic exposure in children using a systematic method. Our results indicated that pre and postnatal antibiotic use increased the ASD risk. This is consistent with previous reports that pre-
and postnatal antibiotic use causes ASD in children . In our study, both pre- and postnatal
antibiotic use increased the ASD risk ; however, only prenatal, but not postnatal, antibiotic
use was significantly elevated in children with ASD compared to controls . It is difficult
to compare or discuss the risk levels of prenatal and postnatal antibiotic use because studies on the
relationship between ASD risk and postnatal antibiotic use did not specify the prenatal antibiotic
exposure . Further, studies on the relationship between ASD onset and prenatal antibiotic use
did not specifically mention a follow-up on postnatal antibiotic exposure . However, the results
of our bidirectional meta-analysis suggest that prenatal antibiotic exposure is a more potent risk
factor for ASD. This is further indicated by a pre-birth cohort study that examined the association
between pre- and postnatal smoking exposure and atopic eczema, and reported that only prenatal
smoking exposure increased the risk of atopic eczema by 7.11 times compared to postnatal smoking
exposure . Moreover, ASD, which is an early complex neurodevelopmental disorder, is known
to develop before the age of three. In particular, the fetal period is a crucial period in brain
development and exposure to harmful environmental factors during this period can substantially
increase the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders . One study reported that prenatal opiate
exposure affected brain development  Therefore, prenatal antibiotic exposure is believed to be an
important risk factor for ASD onset . Indeed, early postnatal antibiotic exposure is known to
increase ASD risk. However, in our study, the reduced influence of postnatal antibiotic exposure on
increasing ASD risk could be attributed to the age range of our study population .
Further studies comparing pre- and postnatal antibiotic use with adjustment for various confounders
should be conducted to confirm our results.
Although we systematically analyzed the relationship between ASD and early antibiotic exposure,
this study has a few limitations. First, although we analyzed various data on antibiotic exposure,
including the number and amount of exposure as well as diverse antibiotic mechanisms, we could not
analyze according to antibiotic type due to insufficient data. Further, we did not consider the gestational
age in prenatal exposure and used a wide age range for postnatal exposure. Second, although we
used a random-effects model to address the high heterogeneity and indicated no publication bias,
except for the total results relating to ASD in early exposure, we had a limited sample size. Third,
postnatal antibiotic exposure remains controversial. Although the test results on publication bias
showed low statistical significance, they cannot be considered conclusive on their own given the small
sample size and their closeness to statistical significance. There has been ambiguity in distinguishing
different periods in previous studies on the effects of pre- and postnatal antibiotic use. Further, small
experimental and large investigative studies reported contradicting findings due to the difficulty of
adjusting for various confounders, which were described as limitations. Thus, there is a need for large
controlled experimental or cohort studies adjusting for potential confounders to clearly determine the
impact of postnatal antibiotic exposure on ASD.
Notwithstanding these limitations, this study remains significant since it used two-sided
meta-analyses to systematically analyze the relationship between ASD and early antibiotic exposure
and provides more evidence on the association between ASD risk and prenatal antibiotic exposure.
Subsequent studies should further analyze the association of pre- and postnatal antibiotic exposure
with ASD to contribute towards lowering the ASD risk and the prevention and management of ASD
in children.


