Autism spectrum disorder is a complex group of developmental disorders characterized by difficulties in communication
and social interaction and the presence of repetitive body movements or behaviors that can persist throughout life 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
and the Environmental Protection Agency  of the US, recently more children are being diagnosed with ASD. The overall preva-
lence of ASD increased from 1.1% in 2012 to 1.7% in 2014, based on an analysis of medical and school records of 8-year-olds from 11
monitoring sites across the US  Some of the increase in the preva-
lence of ASD may be related to increased monitoring and a broadening of diagnostic criteria  It is unclear whether and to what extent environmental factors
have contributed to the recent increase in ASD. Previous studies suggested that both genetic and environmental factors might play a
role in ASD (Flores-Pajot et al., 2016). One environmental risk factor of interest in the etiology of ASD is exposure to ambient air
pollution. There are six common air pollutants, called criteria pollutants, identified by the US Clean Air Act of 1970: ground-level ozone , lead, particulate matter , carbon monoxide
, nitrogen dioxide , and sulfur dioxide , which are the only air pollutants under national air quality standards.
PM is a complex mixture classified by size into PM2.5  and PM10  that vary by place and time
depending on local industries and infrastructure. Main emission  sources of the others have been known chemical reactions, trans-
portation, and other combustion products . While a few studies in Europe have reported no association
, a number of studies in the US and other countries have reported associations
between maternal exposure to ambient air pollution and ASD in children The different findings may be related to several factors: ASD
ascertainment method, air pollutant and study population. The European studies took into account autistic traits and also examined NOx and PM10 instead of NO2 and PM2.5, or multi countries
which would be more heterogeneous than a single country. Thedifferences between US and Europe could be explained by differences on air pollution levels and sources.
Even though epidemiologic studies found maternal exposure to air pollutants associated with the ASD, the mechanism underlying
this association was not clearly understood. Recent animal experiments with mice found that exposure to unhealthy levels of particulate matter during pregnancy could cause subtle changes in the
structure of the cerebral cortex , as seen in the brains of autistic patients
. A possible mechanism is related to increased neuroinflammation, which leads to decreased expression of the
protein reelindwhich activates a signaling pathway required for proper positioning of neurons in the braindboth events common
with autism . Some studies on human pregnancy have found that prenatal
exposure to air pollution during the developmental stage of the
central nervous system may be linked to a systemic inflammatory
response, which could result in neuronal injury Other studies have also
reported that prenatal exposure to environmental toxicants may be
associated with ASD. However, the relationship between exposure time
and fetal development remains unclear. There have been some differences in findings and approaches by
previous systematic reviews and meta-analyses . Lam et al. concluded that there was limited evidence for associations between overall air pollution exposure in early life and ASD, but they found sufficient
evidence, most notably, between prenatal exposures to PM2.5 or PM10 and ASD. Flores-Pajot et al. investigated varied exposure times
and found evidence that prenatal exposure to PM2.5 and ozone and
postnatal exposure to PM2.5 and NO2 were associated with ASD.
Yang et al. pointed out that a semi-Bayesian logistic model might
improve the plausibility and stability of estimates. They discussed
the need for some well-designed studies with a large sample, less
misclassification or measurement of individual-level exposures,
and consideration of multiple confounders.
For meta-analysis there are four areas for further investigations

regarding associations between air pollutants and ASD development in children: which pollutant ,

to what extent , what method, and when . Adverse health effect of maternal exposures to ambient air pollution on children may vary
according to the exposure time. A natural question is: if there is a
critical time window of exposure that is more associated with ASD
development in children. In this systematic review, we conducted a systematic search of
literature on maternal exposure to ambient air pollution and ASD
since 2007, which resulted in an ultimate focus on PM2.5, PM10, NO2,
and ozone. This focus was mainly due to eligible studies’ availability, not our preference for the four pollutants. We also examined
the exposure time by trimester, considering fetal development
during pregnancy.
The protocol of this study was registered in PROSPERO. A systematic literature search
in Medline, Embase, and Web of Science was performed using the
combination of Medical Subject Headings  related to ASD
and maternal exposure  to air pollution since 2007. We included criteria air contaminants, haz-
ardous air pollutants and related pollutants , persistent organic pollutants ,
heavy metals, and toxicants. We used several keywords for HAP with the help of a librarian at the Ottawa
Hospital. Searches were limited to studies with an abstract published in the English language with a publication date between
We used Covidence  to screen studies based on title and abstract. Covidence is a Cochrane technology platform that
enables the whole review team to collaborate remotely by keeping
full records of who voted to include a study and capturing reasons
for exclusion so reviewers can resolve any disagreements. We 
identified eligible articles for this study using the following inclusion criteria:  study design was observational, including
ecological, case-control, and cohort studies; study participants
included children and/or mothers;  ASD diagnosis was made
based on clinical assessments, self-report questionnaires or structured interviews;  measure of air pollution exposure or during
conception and pregnancy  or at the time of birth (perinatal exposure) or during childhood 
and (5) information on the sample size and air pollution. The
exclusion criteria were: studies that used animal models;  full
article not in English; and  abstracts, case reports, comments,
reviews, conference proceedings, or book chapters. After reviewing abstracts, we short-listed full-text articles for
the eligibility assessment, uploading all the original studies to
Covidence and extracting data. Extracted information included:
authors, year of publication, title, journal, study location ,
study design, study population, case and control ,
exposure time and measurement method, ASD ascertainment
method, outcome, analysis model, covariates, and main findings
from each full-text article.
. Assessment of risk of bias Risk of bias was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality
Assessment Scale   and Lam et al.’s navigation guide . The NOS consists of eight items to evaluate
sources of bias, such as definition and selection of case and controls,
adequate sample size, comparability of cases and controls on the
basis of the design or analysis, and non-response rate. Studies were
given a maximum of 1 point for each of the seven items and 2
points for comparability only, making the maximum score 9 points.
Higher scores suggested a lower risk of bias. According to Lam
et al.’s navigation guide, we also rated each study as “high quality”,

“moderate quality” and “low quality” in terms of exposure assess-
ment, selective outcome reporting, and confidence in effect esti-
mates. We set up a cut-off score of 7 with the NOS and “moderate
quality” with the navigation guide for this review study to maintain
low risk of bias.
First, we categorized eligible studies by air pollutant , exposure time , study design, and modelling . The 4 exposure time periods were included to assess time-
varying associations. Second, we derived meta-estimates for ASD
associated with the 4 air pollutants. We applied both frequentist
and Bayesian approaches for fixed effect model and random effects
model for each air pollutant and each exposure time to calculate
the pooled odds ratios  per 10 units of that pollutant: PM2.5
and PM10 in mg/m3 and NO2 and ozone in parts per billion .
Since we were concerned with the small number of studies
included for each air pollutant, we employed a Bayesian random
effects model in addition to frequentist fixed and random effects
models. The Bayesian pooling method can reflect more uncertainty
of pooled OR than frequentist pooling . For a given
air pollutant, we assumed that the observed study-specific ORs were normally distributed with unknown true study-specific
mean and variance, and that the true study-specific means were
normally distributed with unknown air pollutant-specific mean 
and variance, which indicated the heterogeneity among the
Since information on both mean (mi) and variance ðs2
it was limited, non-informative priors, diffused over a large range for each
mean and standard deviation, were applied. In this study the median of the posterior distribution of the mean mi will be reported as
the meta-analysis pooled log  along with 95% posterior interval
Various tests for heterogeneity using I2 and Q-statistic with
degrees of freedom as well as the p-value of the test were done. In
addition, we included Egger test and Funnel plots to show the
publication bias since publication of positive findings has been an
important concern in meta-analytic reviews of the literature. The
degree of symmetry found in funnel plots indicates absence of
publication bias .
Sensitivity analyses over study design and exposure time were
also undertaken to assess the robustness of the results. All statistical analyses for this study were conducted using statistical
software R Stan and Metafor 
were identified through the search strategy, of which 994 publications were included once duplicates were removed. After
excluding studies that were non-human or non-air pollutant, 62
articles were short-listed for the full-text assessment, which
resulted in further exclusion of 37 articles for various reasons.
Finally, 25 eligible articles were included in our review.
 shows the characteristics of the included studies sorted
by publication year. The 25 eligible studies were conducted in 11
countries: USA , Sweden, Netherlands , Italy , Spain ,
Taiwan , China , Canada  Denmark , Iran , and Israel
 While 24 studies were done for a single country, a study by
Guxens et al. was conducted in the 4 countries in Europe simulta-
neously. As for study design, there were 21 case-control studies, 3
cohort studies, and 1 ecological study. While the case-control and
cohort designs were based on individual level data, the ecological
design used either exposure or ASD occurrence at group level.
Studies published between 2007 and 2019 were initially searched
to minimize discrepancy in their ASD definition and diagnosis
methods, considering recent year studies more comparable. Of

those, studies for 2010e2019 were considered for systematic review based on the four selected air pollutants, and studies for
were included for meta-analysis based on the exposure
time (trimesters and prenatal period), given the sudden increase in
the prevalence of ASD that might be related to broadening diagnostic criteria (Rice et al., 2012; Dawson and Bernier, 2013). This is
desirable for meta-analysis because it reduced between-study differences related to diagnosis methods.
Among the 25 eligible studies, 23, specifically assessed prenatal air pollution,
and of those, 11 included trimester-specific analyses. The most
commonly assessed air pollutant was PM10, which was included in 14 studies, followed by PM2.5 , NO2 , ozone , traffic-related air pollution , and SO2 . Nineteen studies identified ASD cases using records from
existing autism databases, such as the US Autism and Develop mental Disabilities Monitoring  Network, the California
Department of Developmental Services  and the British
Columbia Autism Assessment Network. Other studies utilized ASD
screening tools, such as the Autism-Tics, ADHD, and other Comorbidities ( inventory, to ascertain cases to be included in the
studies. The other 2 studies used maternal reports and validated by
Autism Diagnostic Interview .
See more details on model covariates, air pollutant concentration
measurement methods, and ASD ascertainment methods in
Table A1 in Appendix. We looked at the studies by study period
since the prevalence of ASD has risen dramatically in recent years
and there is a need to see how air pollution might be contributing
to the increased prevalence. However, recent studies with recent
birth cohort show that there is no association between maternal air
pollution exposure and ASD indicating that little was known about
the potential association between exposure and ASD.
We applied both the NOS and Lam
et al.’s navigation guide to the 25 eligible studies based on their
characteristics in Table 1 and Table A1. By inclusion/
exclusion criteria we found that four air pollutants had at least 3 comparable studies with comparable

exposure time, which were required for meta-
analysis. We excluded 11 studies since they reported other air

pollutants , examined pre-conception or post-natal
period , or other reasons  , from which 14 studies remained for our meta-analysis. Both
screening tools resulted in the same quality of the 14 selected
studies for the meta-analysis. The 14 studies had a median score of
8 (out of 9) from the NOS, and high or moderate quality from the
navigation guide, indicating low bias.
3.4. Study findings from systematic review: association between air
pollutants and ASD per 8.87 mg/m3

, respectively. In 2018, however, 2 other studies,
Goodrich et al. and Kerin et al., found no association, even though
their study populations also consisted of Californian children. In
2015, Raz et al. found an increased OR of 1.42  per
4.40 mg/m3 especially for trimester 3 based on the Nurses’ Health
Study II. Furthermore, in 2017 Kim et al. found PM2.5 and total copy
number variations (CNV), a type of genomic changes that
contribute to autism susceptibility, together were associated with a
higher risk of ASD than PM2.5 alone. There is also evidence to
suggest an association between postnatal PM2.5 exposure and ASD.
In 2018, Chen et al. found that PM2.5 exposure in the 2nd and 3rd
year of life resulted in an OR of 1.50 (1.01, 2.22) and 1.78 (1.05, 3.02),
respectively, per 3.4 mg/m3

. As well, in 2018 Ritz et al. reported that
at 9 months of age, there is an OR of 1.04  per 3.61 mg/m3
.
Excluding 4 studies  due to ecological study designs,
different methods of ascertaining cases and controls, or longer
exposure time (e.g., prenatal and postnatal period combined), we

included the remaining 9 studies for our meta-analysis. Meta-an-
alyses with 11 studies with postnatal studies were done in the sensitivity analysis later.
Association between PM10 and ASD. Nine studies were
considered for the meta-estimate and Table C2 summarizes the
study-specific ORs. While 4 studies estimated the OR for each
trimester and the prenatal period, 1 study (Kalkbrenner et al., 2015)
did for T1, T2 and T3 separately only, and 2 studies (Gong et al.,
2017; Guxens et al., 2016) did for T4 only. The heterogeneity test

(Q(df 1⁄4 8) 1⁄4 20.33, p-val 1⁄4 .0092, I2 1⁄4 74.96%) suggests consider-
able heterogeneity among the studies. The meta-estimates from 3

methods (Fig. 3) indicate no significant ORs (See Fig. F2 for log-scale
in Appendix F.).
3.5.1.3. Association between NO2 and ASD. Seven studies were
considered for the meta-estimate and Table C3 summarizes the

study-specific ORs. The heterogeneity test (Q(df 1⁄4 6) 1⁄4 17.58, p-
val 1⁄4 .0074, I2 1⁄4 58.31%) suggests considerable heterogeneity

among the studies. The meta-estimates show no significant ORs
(Fig. 4). The frequentist fixed and random models returned same
and significant ORs, but the Bayesian random effects model did not:
1.02 (1.01, 1.03), 1.02 (1.01, 1.04), and 1.02 (1.00, 1.05) per 10 ppb
from fixed, random and Bayesian models, respectively (See Fig. F3
for log-scale in Appendix F.).
3.5.1.4. Association between ozone and ASD. Four studies were
considered for the meta-estimate and Table C4 summarizes the

study-specific ORs. The heterogeneity test  suggests no heterogeneity. The meta-estimates

of ozone returned inconsistent results between frequentist and
Bayesian models 
3.5.2. Time-specific associations with ASD
3.5.2.1. During pregnancy . Guxens et al. reported the ORs for
the prenatal period only  for EU and 4 individual countries. We

considered this particular study as one for meta-
analysis. We checked publication bias through funnel plots for

prenatal period (only (not shown). None displayed considerable
publication bias, as all plots showed symmetric distributions. In
addition, Egger’s test  was not statistically
significant, so there’s no evidence of publication bias according to
this test (Egger et al., 1997). Among the 4 air pollutants, PM2.5 and
ozone returned the highest and lowest OR, respectively .
The two frequentist fixed and random effects models returned
significant pooled OR for PM2.5 and ozone, but not for PM10 and NO2
. No Bayesian model
returned significant pooled OR.

3.5.2.2. First trimester . Table C5 summarizes the meta-
estimates for trimester 1. PM2.5 and ozone returned the highest

and lowest OR, respectively. Both frequentist models returned significant OR for PM2.5 and NO2,
whereas Bayesian random effects models did not for PM10, NO2 and
ozone 

3.5.2.3. Second trimester . Table C6 summarizes meta-
estimates for trimester 2. Again PM2.5 and ozone returned the

highest and lowest OR, respectively. Both frequentist models
3.5.2.5. Temporal changes in associations over trimesters.. 6
displays eight studies with inconsistent temporal patterns and a
meta-estimate for PM2.5 only. Overall, they showed most and least
consistency for T1 and T3, respectively. Combining the 8 studies,
the Bayesian meta-estimates returned a slightly increasing trend
but not statistically significant changes in the ORs: 1.02, 1.04, and
1.04, for trimesters 1 to 3, respectively.

For PM2.5, PM10, NO2, and ozone, Table C8 summarizes meta-
estimates. Overall, except for NO2, an increasing trend over the

trimester was in common among the 4 air pollutants.
. Sensitivity analysis.  overall shows little bias

of publication.  demonstrates each study’s relative contri-
bution to the meta-estimates for each air pollutant. We found 1 to 3

studies contributed at least 20% of each pollutant: two out of 9
studies (Volk et al., and Ritz et al.) for PM2.5; three out of 9 studies
To focus on maternal exposure, our meta-analysis excluded two
studies in Table 1 because they reported the ORs for a postnatal
period only (Jung et al., 2013) or a combined period with prenatal

period (Kim et al., 2017) but included 5 studies that reported pre-conception or post-natal periods along with prenatal period


If one study included before  and after post-natal)the prenatal period , respectively, we included the study

as 3 individual studies with each exposure time. Thus the number
of studies is bigger than reported in Table C9. The meta-estimates of
ORs within each air pollutant are consistently higher for the period
of prenatal or post-natal combined but lower for the period of
prenatal or pre-conception combined. Overall meta-estimates of
the prenatal combined with postnatal period appeared to be higher
than the prenatal period only.
temporal trend in associations during pregnancy cannot be

concluded due to the discrepancies between studies and the dis-
agreements in significance between meta-analysis methods (sig-
nificance by frequentist vs insignificance by Bayesian).

It is widely recognized that the etiology of ASD is complex and

related to many factors, including genetic background, environ-
mental risk factors, and gene-environment interactions (Landrigan

et al., 2012; Dawson and Bernier, 2013). Earlier research on the
cause of ASD focused largely on genetic changes or mutations
(Autism Genome Project Consortium et al., 2007; Landrigan et al.,
2012; Von Ehrenstein et al., 2014). However, it is now understood
that the perinatal period is critical for brain development. Thus
exposure to environmental chemicals during this time could
disturb normal neurodevelopment (Eskenazi et al., 2007;

Landrigan et al., 2012; Ye et al., 2017), therefore providing a plau-
sible link between environmental risk factors and ASD. Our sys-
tematic review, which is updated by including more recent studies,

provides similar findings to the previous studies (Becerra et al.,
2013; Raz et al., 2015). While there was some evidence indicating
maternal exposure to PM2.5 may increase the risk of ASD, evidence
for the effect of ozone, PM10, and NO2 on ASD is weak or limited. An
increase in the number of studies for a future meta-analysis would
improve statistical power to identify associations between air
pollutants and ASD.
This systematic review summarized 25 studies that examined

the association between maternal exposure to ambient air pollut-
ants and ASD in children. The study findings were inconsistent and

meta-analyses were applied to pool the study results. We grouped
the study-specific ORs by air pollutant (PM2.5, PM10, NO2, and
ozone) and exposure time (trimesters), and found limited evidence
for positive associations. Among the four air pollutants, PM2.5
resulted in the highest OR for the prenatal period: 1.06(1.01,1.11)
and 1.06(1.00,1.13) from frequentist and Bayesian random effects
model, respectively. The odds of ASD in children were 6% higher
through maternal exposure to PM2.5. However, PM2.5 is a mixture of
various fine particles, and thus further investigations to examine
specific PM components linked to ASD are necessary to analyze this
difference between PM2.5 and the other three pollutants.
Exposure time differences in 4 pre-determined periods

(trimester 1 to 3 and prenatal) and 2 more extended periods to pre-
conception and postnatal period were examined under sensitivity

analysis. All meta-estimates were comparable, implying little dif-
ference regarding exposure time related to pregnancy. However,

there was an uncertain indication that postnatal exposures might
be more linked to the ASD than pre-conception, which was

consistent among the 4 pollutants. The trend in the trimester-
specific ORs was investigated. Trimester 3 was found to be more

associated with the ASD than the others. The myelin sheath is a
plasma membrane extension that is laid down in regularly spaced
segments along axons of the nervous system. This process involves
extensive changes in oligodendrocyte cell shape and membrane
architecture. Myelination starts around 24e25 weeks of gestation
and reaches its peak by 1 year of age (Purves et al., 2012). Imaging
and biopsy of the brains of autistic children have shown a deficit in
myelination as compared to normal children (Aoki et al., 2013;
Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2010). Such a diminution would weaken the
operation of the axon-target synapse, thereby accounting for the
malfunction of areas of the brain involved in behavior. This would
include the prefrontal and temporal areas of the brain. As the
myelination process starts late second trimester, it could have more
impact on the third trimester. This might explain a finding of this
study that the associations between air pollution and the ASD are
likely higher for the third trimester compared to the others A temporal trend in associations during pregnancy cannot be

concluded due to the discrepancies between studies and the dis-
agreements in significance between meta-analysis methods (sig-
nificance by frequentist vs insignificance by Bayesian).

It is widely recognized that the etiology of ASD is complex and

related to many factors, including genetic background, environ-
mental risk factors, and gene-environment interactions (Landrigan

et al., 2012; Dawson and Bernier, 2013). Earlier research on the
cause of ASD focused largely on genetic changes or mutations
(Autism Genome Project Consortium et al., 2007; Landrigan et al.,
2012; Von Ehrenstein et al., 2014). However, it is now understood
that the perinatal period is critical for brain development. Thus
exposure to environmental chemicals during this time could
disturb normal neurodevelopment (Eskenazi et al., 2007;

Landrigan et al., 2012; Ye et al., 2017), therefore providing a plau-
sible link between environmental risk factors and ASD. Our sys-
tematic review, which is updated by including more recent studies,

provides similar findings to the previous studies (Becerra et al.,
2013; Raz et al., 2015). While there was some evidence indicating
maternal exposure to PM2.5 may increase the risk of ASD, evidence
for the effect of ozone, PM10, and NO2 on ASD is weak or limited. An
increase in the number of studies for a future meta-analysis would
improve statistical power to identify associations between air
pollutants and ASD.
4.1. Difference by exposure time
The five studies in 6 show difference between trimesters. In

practice, the difference can be detected when the maternal expo-
sure concentrations vary over time or when some effect modifiers

including behaviors (physical and mental) changes over time. For
example, the former can be explained if the mothers avoided going
outside during a specific trimester, and the latter can result if they
were on medications or dietary supplements for a specific
trimester.
While two air pollution studies (Kalkbrenner et al., 2015; Raz
et al., 2015) concluded ASD associations to be specific to the third
trimester, the mechanism remains largely unknown. Weisskopf
et al. (2015) speculated that women working outside the home
may be more focused on prescribed rest or maternal leave in the
third trimester. This work-pattern change may open more time for
outside activities which in turn could affect the amount of PM
exposure, However, other potentially relevant studies on physical
and mental behavior changes suggest varied results, often in
different trimesters with involvement of certain biological events
or personal behavior (Weisskopf et al., 2015; Ng et al., 2017).

Attempts were made to quantify changes in leisure-time phys-
ical activity (LTPA) during the first half of pregnancy compared with

the year prior to pregnancy (Amezcua-Prieto et al., 2013). After
studying 1175 healthy pregnant women, it was concluded that
pregnancy involved a decrease in LTPA, not only in frequency, but
also duration and intensity. Physical activity can be further reduced
due to musculoskeletal pain in the back, hand-wrist and hip, factors
which complicate pregnancy and mobility especially in the third
trimester (Kesikburun et al., 2018). As pregnancy progresses, a
period of emotional and behavioral changes (Lagadec et al., 2018)
ensues. This can include: different nutritional choices, efforts to
quit smoking and gestational weight gain (Levine et al., 2015). An

increase in stress can follow causing a depletion of metabolic re-
sources. Seebacher et al. (2013) concluded that in late-stage preg-
nancy, the metabolic cost of activity or behavior could render

reproduction sensitive to environmental changes.
It should be noted that the maternal exposures by trimester are

correlated, which would reduce statistical power to detect differ-
ences in ASD development of children by trimester. Studies focusing on time-varying associations will be necessary before a
conclusion can be reached regarding a critical time window of
exposure associated with an increased risk of ASD development.
Identifying the critical exposure time may become an important
step in guiding and counseling pregnant women.
Strengths of this review
Our approach for systematic review in this study is not much
different from other systematic studies on the ASD. For example,
search strategy and meta-analysis are comparable. However, we

focused on five areas including study publication time, environ-
mental cause of the ASD, target population, meta-analysis method

and time-varying associations. (1) We examined more recent
studies published by April 2019 and thus could update study
findings. (2) The environmental causes of the ASD are still unknown

and we focused on specific ambient air pollution. (3) As the diag-
nosis methods ASD have changed, we focused, in particular, on

children to reduce the discrepancy in diagnosis ASD. (4) As
mentioned in Discussion, we compared three meta-analysis
methods: frequentist fixed and random effects models, and
Bayesian random effect model. (5) We demonstrated inconsistent
time-varying associations over trimesters between air pollutants
and between studies. We believe that this study added updated
findings in these five areas.
Applying a Bayesian random effects model and its associated

rigors is the primary strength. While the fixed effects model con-
siders sampling variation within individual studies only, the

random effects model also consider between-study variations, thus

producing larger standard error of estimates (wider interval esti-
mates). There are 2 approaches for the random effects model, the

frequentist and Bayesian methods. Typically, the frequentist
random effects model has been applied to most meta-analysis: for
example, recently by Lam et al. (2016) and Flores-Pajot et al. 

A small sampling of studies often results in considerable discrep-
ancies between these methods. When discrepancies appear, . 2e5, the Bayesian estimates are more reliable in
integrating multiple studies on the same or comparable research

questions, even though they return weaker evidence than the fre-
quentist estimates. In addition, there is another reason to consider

the Bayesian model: when there are unusually higher or lower
study estimates than the others. For example, Volk et al.
returned higher ORs with relatively smaller intervals compared to

the other studies. The influence of this specific study on the meta-
estimate is reduced by the Bayesian model. This is also a preferred

feature for integrating multi-study results by reducing bias in meta-
analysis.

Secondly, the differences in exposure-time during pregnancy for
each pollutant was evaluated. The time variation pattern can differ
among pollutants. While one could be more critical to the earliest
stage of pregnancy, others could affect later stages of pregnancy.
Previous studies centered mainly on the entire pregnancy period
and assumed the association constant with pregnancy. While
Flores-Pajot et al.  captured critical exposure windows during
pregnancy  the conclusion

was that there is a need to track residential mobility during preg-
nancy to account for changes in exposure. Similarly, Lam et al.

 highlighted the inaccuracy of exposure assessment
methods in their study limitations. Flores-Pajot et al. and Lam et al.
considered misclassifications of exposures during pregnancy. To
understand observed differences between trimesters, this study
considered maternal changes in physical, behavioral and emotional
aspects.
Lyall et al. confirm that several studies have shown sig-
nificant increases in ASD risk associated with particulate matter

and heavy metals. However, diesel exhaust, chemicals from traffic-
related pollutants and heavy metals could not be examined since

many studies reported the 4 air pollutants only. Studies
with long-term exposure time  were
excluded since many mainly reported the prenatal period. We
reviewed articles in English only and thus our meta-analysis
excluded other study results reported in non-English languages.
This could bring in unexpected and unmeasurable bias in our meta-
estimates, which is also a limitation of this review.
In a scoping review for environmental factors associated with
ASD, Ng et al.  summarized the risk factors as: traffic-related
air pollutants; advanced parental age; preterm birth; low birth
weight; hyperbilirubinemia and clustering of pregnancy compli-
cations; and maternal immigrant status. These factors for the meta-
analysis could not be considered due to limited studies. Due to
these limitations, this study focused on the 4 air pollutants for
prenatal period only.
This study reports meta-estimates of the OR based on several
case-control studies, which is the ratio of odds of exposure among
the cases to that of the controls. The OR approximates the relative
risk, which estimates the magnitude of the association between
exposure to the specified ambient air pollutants and the ASD. While
the OR provides relative difference between exposed and unex-
posed groups, another measuredattributable riskdindicates ab-
solute difference in the incidence of the ASD between the two
groups. It quantifies the incidence of the ASD in the exposed group
that could be reduced if not exposed. However, this study cannot
provide the attributable risk, since the incidence could not be
determined from the case-control studies examined in this study.
With the small, barely significant ORs , we
expect the contribution of the specified pollutants to the overall
prevalence of ASD is quite small.
Our meta-analysis on the association between maternal exposure to ambient air pollution during the prenatal period and ASD in
children has produced some evidence for PM2.5, weak evidence for
NO2, little evidence for PM10, and inconclusive evidence for ozone
. The time-varying effects of
maternal exposure over the 3 trimesters were inconsistent, and our
meta-analysis returned insignificant changes over trimester.
However the noticeable difference in the trimesters among studies
merits further investigation.