We systematically reviewed evidence from observational studies on the associations between autism spectrum disorders

(ASD) and early-life antibiotic exposure. Eleven articles were included in the review. Prenatal antibiotic exposure was associ-
ated with a slightly increased risk of ASD in two cohort studies on overlapping populations and in one case–control study;

in three other case–control studies, no signifcant association was found. One cohort study found a slightly reduced risk of
ASD after postnatal antibiotic exposure, while two other cohort studies on overlapping populations and three case–control
studies reported an increased risk. Meta-analysis of the eligible studies showed no signifcant associations. Current data are
conficting and do not conclusively support the hypothesis that early-life antibiotic exposure is associated with subsequent
ASD development.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of neurodevelopmental conditions characterized by persistent defcits
in social communication and restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, beginning in the
developmental period  Currently used term ‘ASD’ is an umbrella diagnosis for a group of conditions, namely: autistic disorder,
Asperger syndrome, childhood disintegrative disorder and
pervasive developmental disorder-not otherwise specifed

The World Health Organization estimates
that approximately one in 160 children has ASD . However, according to recent
studies, the current prevalence of ASD in certain communities may fall between 1 and 2% . Moreover, the prevalence of autism has
steadily risen during the last decades . The etiology of ASD is heterogeneous . Multiple genetic factors, a variety of environmental

factors , and a complex interplay between these factors have

been proposed and extensively studied. A recent rise in the
prevalence of ASD suggests a major role of the environment.
Since the symptoms of ASD typically occur during early
childhood, potential causative factors are most likely to act
during the prenatal and early postnatal periods.
One of the investigated risk factors for ASD is exposure
to antibiotics during pregnancy and childhood. It has been

suggested that the intestinal microbiota afects brain function and human behavior, through the so-called microbiome-gut-brain axis . Antibiotics

are one of the factors known to disturb the composition of

the microbiota in infancy . Additionally, a number of studies have confrmed that individuals

with ASD have diferent intestinal microbiome compositions
compared to those of healthy individuals . In regard to potential efects of antibiotics on ASD,
improvement of ASD symptoms after antibiotic use was
reported in two case studies. However, high use of diferent antibiotics in children
who subsequently developed autism was shown in a number of observational studies. Hypothetically, these observed
efects could be attributable to microbiota alterations, triggering a disturbed immune response and the release of
cytokines, thus, afecting the function of the central nervous system . Recently, a number of observational studies have assessed a possible association of
early-life antibiotic exposure and subsequent development
of ASD. Here we aimed to systematically document available evidence on the association between early life antibiotic

exposure and the prevalence of ASD later in in childhood.
Cohort studies, case–control studies, and cross-sectional
studies were eligible for inclusion in this review. The
included studies needed to investigate an association

between pre- and/or postnatal antibiotic exposure and subsequent diagnosis of ASD. We included studies in which

women during any trimester of pregnancy or infants and/
or children underwent antibiotic treatment. We focused on
early-life antibiotic exposure that preceded a diagnosis of
ASD, which is usually established after the second year of
life (Mandell et al. 2005). Studies on antibiotic exposure in
breastfeeding mothers and subsequent risk of ASD in their
children were not included. Since the hypothesized link

between ASD and antibiotic use is based on the aforementioned microbiome-gut-brain axis mechanism, only stud-
ies which reported data on systemic and/or oral antibiotic

therapy were taken into an account. Any antibiotic types

and doses, as well as any treatment durations and indications were admissible, as long as the therapy fulflled the

aforementioned criteria. Studies that reported data on antibiotic use collectively (e.g., along with other medications)

or that did not report numerical data were excluded. Studies
in which the data on antibiotic use was collected only for the
purpose of baseline characteristic of participants, with no
analysis of the association between antibiotic use and ASD
were also excluded.
Our outcome of interest was the diagnosis of ASD during

childhood. Studies in which the diagnosis was made according to established criteria, such as those described in the

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-V
 as well as studies in which ASD was reported by parents, caregivers or

doctors without any described specifc criteria, were available for inclusion. Studies that reported data on ASD only
collectively with other neurodevelopmental disorders , were
excluded. Only studies that compared children with ASD up
to 18 years of age to generally healthy children without this
diagnosis were included.
A systematic literature search was performed on 28th of

August 2018, with no language or publication date restrictions. The databases searched were PubMed, Embase, and

PsycINFO. After drafting the frst version of the manuscript,
we ran a search update on the 11th of December 2018. The
full search strategies for PubMed and Embase are presented

in Online Resource 1. Additionally, reference lists of identifed observational studies and relevant review articles were
manually screened.
Three authors/reviewers  independently
screened the title of each study identifed with the search

strategy as well as the abstracts of potentially relevant articles. Subsequently, the full text for each study potentially

relevant after abstract screening, as well as that for studies of
unclear relevance, was retrieved. Each author independently

assessed the eligibility of the articles and, in cases of a disagreement, resolved diferences by discussion.
Data were extracted with the use of a standard data extraction form. The extracted data included study year, country,

design, population, defnition of exposure, defnitions of
cases and controls, defnition of
outcome, results, confounding factors,
and data collection methods. We extracted and reported all
the data using the same terminology as the authors of the
original articles.
Risk of bias was assessed using the Newcastle–Ottawa
Scale, in which the reviewers assign stars in all predefned bias domains. In the com-
parability domain the reviewers have to assign 0, 1, or 2

stars on the basis of the number and types of confounding

factors controlled for. Multiple important confounding factors may play a role in studies on the antibiotic-ASD asso-
ciation, including those related to diferent demographics,

pregnancy-related complications, mothers’ obstetrical histories, child characteristics at birth, infections, environmental

exposures, and healthcare use (Lyall et al. 2017). The NOS

requires the reviewers to assign stars depending on two chosen, most important factors. After the literature search and

discussion, we found no rationale to decide whether any of
the above-mentioned factors was more important than the

others. Therefore, we decided to assign zero stars to studies in which no confounding factors were controlled for or

the adjustment was unclear, and two stars to studies which
controlled for any confounding factors. Additionally, for
informative purposes, we present confounders identifed in
each study in a separate table. We decided to present risk
of bias only descriptively and no collective score for the
included studies was counted.A meta-analysis of the fndings was performed if at least two
studies of the same type reported the
adjusted odds ratios (aOR) or adjusted hazard ratios (aHR)

of ASD being diagnosed in participants exposed to antibiotics during the same life period (pre- or postnatally). We

performed the meta-analyses using the Review Manager 5.3
software by the Cochrane Collaboration. Generic inverse

variance with the random efects model was used. Additionally, the fxed efects model was applied to see how it would

infuence the results. To enable a graphic presentation of the

fndings in studies which didn’t report OR or HR, we calculated crude ORs/HRs and 95% confdence intervals (95% CI)

of ASD being diagnosed after antibiotic exposure, provided
the data were sufcient.In total, we identifed 6820 records by the database search
and 891 records by reference screening. After exclusion
of duplicates and title and abstract screening, the full

texts of 63 articles were assessed for eligibility. Thirty-
seven observational studies on risk factors for autism were

excluded because they did not report antibiotic exposure.
Reasons for exclusion of the remaining 15 studies are
listed in Online Resource 2. After full-text assessment,
11 articles ultimately met the inclusion criteria for this

Online Resources 3 and 4 present characteristics and
main results of the included studies. Four of those studies

were cohort studies, and seven of them were case–control studies. Among the included cohort studies, three

Danish studies were performed in overlapping populations. Five studies examined prenatal antibiotic

exposure, fve assessed early childhood antibiotic exposure
and 1 study examined both types of exposure. In the majority of included studies, use of any
antibiotic, for any indication and duration and at any dose

within the defned time period, was analyzed. Additionally, all of the cohort studies and two of the case–control

studies included a number of secondary/sensitivity analyses, taking antibiotic type, spectrum, timing, number of

courses, and/or indication into account.
Overall, three out of four included cohort studies earned a
maximum number of stars, and only one study lost one star

in one of the NOS domains. In contrast, all of the case–control studies carried a considerable amount of bias, mostly

concerning case defnitions, control for confounding factors,

and ascertainment of exposure. Details of risk of bias assessment for cohort and case–control studies, respectively, are

presented in Online Resource 5. Additionally, we listed all
the confounding factors used in adjusted analyses in Online

Prenatal Antibiotic Exposure
Cohort Studies
Prenatal antibiotic exposure as a risk factor for autism was
examined in two large Danish cohort studies performed

in overlapping populations. The studies involved, respectively:

was most likely contained within the population of the second, therefore, we didn’t perform a meta-analysis. The frst

study reported a borderline signifcant increase in the risk
of ASD after use of any antibiotics anytime during pregnancy . A stronger association of prenatal
antibiotic exposure with the risk of ASD was reported for
the use of sulfonamides anytime during pregnancy 
trimester. Similar results were observed for infantile autism
(defned as ICD-10 code F84.0 assigned to participant), with
the strongest association reported for the use of macrolides
anytime during the pregnancy .
Confounding factors controlled for in adjusted model were
as follows: gender, maternal age, parity, maternal smoking
during pregnancy, paternal age, parental psychiatric history,
and parents’ educational status.

The second study reported a signifcant, positive asso-
ciation between exposure to any antibiotic anytime during

pregnancy and subsequent risk of autism in the ofspring
. The analysis was adjusted
only for sex and age. Assessment of this association was not
a primary focus of the study, and it was only reported as a
secondary analysis in the supplementary materials.
Case–Control Studies
Four of the included case–control studies examined risk of
ASD after prenatal antibiotic exposure. Among them, two
clinic-based studies ,
were available for a meta-analysis. They were conducted in
groups of children of 343, respectively. None of those studies found sig-
nifcant associations between antibiotic use and ASD, with

while the second study controlled for a number of
perinatal, gestational, and socioeconomic variables

In one study conducted in 288 Polish children including 96 with autism , the results

were presented as the percent of cases versus percent of controls exposed to prenatal antibiotics. The univariate model

revealed signifcantly higher exposure to antibiotics in the
autism group 
 However, for undescribed reasons, the antibiotics were analyzed only collectively with other medications in the multivariate model.

The last study was performed in 415 Swedish children,

including 206 with ASD . In the sta-
tistical model, autism was regressed on antibiotic use during pregnancy. The data were presented as logistic regression betas in the form of log odds and

were reported by the authors as not statistically signifcant.
None of the aforementioned case control studies investigated type of antibiotic, duration of antibiotic therapy, or its

timing during pregnancy.
Early childhood antibiotic exposure as a risk factor for
autism was examined in three cohort studies. One study
performed in 214,834 Canadian children, including 2965
with ASD (Hamad et al. 2018), reported a trend towards a

reduced risk of ASD in children exposed to any antibiotics during the frst year of life after adjusting for relevant
demographic, prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal factors . Stratifying the analysis by sex and
region resulted in a statistically signifcant association in males and in children from
urban regions . In secondary analyses, a borderline signifcance was found for the association of specifc antibiotic groups with ASD, namely peni-
cillin ) and macrolides. The number of antibiotic courses
and duration of therapy were not associated with ASD risk.

In additional analysis of sibling-controlled design, antibiotics use was not associated with risk of developing ASD.
Two other cohort studies were nation-wide, registerbased studies of the Danish population. Both of these studies derived data from the same registers and covered similar

time periods, so their populations largely overlapped. In
one study in 677,403 children, including 8267 with autism
, a slightly increased risk of autism
was observed in children exposed postnatally to penicillin

 as well as to broader-spectrum antibiotics compared

to children unexposed to antibiotics in the standard model.
However, a signifcant association was no longer observed
in the between-within sibling model . In another
study performed in 780,547 children including 9352 with
autism (Wimberley et al. 2018), the risk of autism increased
after broad-spectrum antibiotic exposure before the age of
5. Moreover, risk of autism

was higher after exposure to broad-spectrum and moderate spectrum antibiotics anytime during childhood . Both of these studies controlled for a range
of potential confounders, including diferent demographic,
pregnancy and neonatal factors, parental psychiatric history,
and parity.
Since at least two studies of the same type reported the
aHR of ASD after antibiotic exposure, a meta-analysis was
feasible. However, the two Danish studies were performed in
highly overlapping populations, so pooling of their data was
not justifable. To perform a meta-analysis, we used the data
from the 1 of the 2 Danish studies, in which the exposure
and its timing were consistent with those in the Canadian
study. Pooling of the data did not yield
any signifcant association between antibiotic exposure and
subsequent diagnosis of ASD, either in the standard model
 or in the sibling model. Three case–control studies examined association between
ASD and childhood antibiotic exposure. One internet survey-based study performed in 1515 children, which reported the data in
the form of logistic regression OR, found a positive association between the number of antibiotic courses taken during
the frst 2 years of life and subsequent diagnosis of ASD in
all performed analyses, including the fnal multifactor model
. The study controlled for age of the child, ethnicity, maternal education, and region.
Another study performed in a group of 214 children  reported crude ORs of autism in children exposed postnatally to antibiotics compared to unexposed unrelated controls  and unexposed healthy siblings . 
Additionally, a multivariable modeling of data was performed with use of the Auto-CM artifcial neural network a method that does not generate numerical results but
rather provides a map of associations of strength between all variables in the data set. According to the authors’ interpretation, the proximity of ‘early antibiotic use’ to the ‘autism
node’ observed on the map may suggest a signifcant association between the two.
In one case control study involving 99 children, the mean number of

antibiotic courses taken before the age of 2 years was signifcantly higher in the autism/ASD group compared to the
control group . Data provided by the
authors were insufcient to calculate ORs.
None of these case–control studies assessed specifc types
of antibiotics nor the duration of therapy within the analyses.
ORs and HRs of ASD
In this review on pre- and postnatal antibiotic exposure and
subsequent risk of autism/ASD, a total of 11 observational
studies were included. In two identifed cohort studies on

prenatal antibiotic exposure performed in overlapping populations, a slightly increased risk of ASD/infantile autism

after the use of various antibiotics was observed. However, 3 of 4 identifed case–control studies did not report any signifcant association between prenatal antibiotic exposure

and autism risk, whereas one reported a positive association
based only on univariate analysis. Three identifed cohort

studies on early childhood antibiotic exposure reported conficting evidence. In one cohort study, a small trend towards
a reduced risk of ASD in infants exposed to various antibiotics in their frst year of life was observed, which was not

signifcant in secondary analyses based on sibling-controlled
design. In another cohort study, a borderline increased
risk of ASD was observed with exposure to certain types
of antibiotics in a standard model but no association was
observed in a between-within sibling model. Finally, in the
third study on a cohort overlapping with the previous one, a
signifcantly higher risk of autism after exposure to various
classes of antibiotics was observed. Data from case–control
studies on antibiotic exposure during childhood were more
consistent. All three of them reported signifcant, positive
associations between antibiotic use and later ASD diagnosis.
To our knowledge, no previous systematic review has

examined antibiotic use during pregnancy and early childhood as a potential risk factor for ASD. A number of meta analyses have reported data on various infections preced-
ing ASD diagnosis , and some
have found signifcant positive associations with infections
occurring during pregnancy. Additionally, one of those systematic reviews
reported increased risk of ASD after prenatal exposure to
diferent medications, including antibiotics, which were,
however, not assessed separately . In

another meta-analysis, no associations between early post-
natal infections and subsequent risk of ASD were found

. On the other hand, some observa-
tional studies have found evidence of a higher risk of mental

disorders after various infections in older children and in
adults . Recently,
more scientifc attention is being drawn towards efects of
early-life antibiotic exposure on long-term health outcomes,
including reports of its negative infuence on neurocognitive
development 
The main strength of this review is its novelty, as no
previous systematic review has focused on the association
between early-life antibiotic exposure and ASD. Our study

utilized a broad search strategy, complemented by an extensive reference hand search, so the possibility of missing

important published data is low. A relatively narrow clinical question allowed us to focus in detail on the included

studies and enabled a clear and meticulous presentation of

fndings. However, this review also has considerable limitations. Compared to the number of other potential environ-
mental risk factors for ASD, antibiotic exposure turned out

to be rarely assessed Thus, only 11 studies were fnally included in the
review, the majority of which were of case–control design.

After division into groups depending on study type and timing of exposure, small groups of 2 to 4 studies were created.

Methods of data reporting in these studies were heterogeneous, further limiting the capacity to perform either qualita-
tive or quantitative synthesis of the data. Moreover, each

of the included case–control studies was characterized by a
signifcant potential risk of bias. Another limitation of this
study is the inclusion of only published data, creating a risk
of publication bias. Finally, we excluded a number of studies
in which infections were explored as potential risk factors
for ASD. Some types of these infections are almost always

treated with antibiotics , so we could

have assumed them to be a proxy for antibiotic exposure.
However, we decided to use only direct data on exposure.
Results of the included studies do not provide conclusive
evidence to support the hypothesis that prenatal antibiotic
exposure is associated with ASD. Although a number of

positive associations was reported in two large cohorts, their populations were largely overlapping, so they cannot be treated as

independent studies for the purpose of this review. Moreover, authors of the study with borderline signifcant results

 emphasize, that within their analysis

they made 106 comparisons with no adjustments for multiple testing, so this borderline signifcant association between

prenatal antibiotic exposure and ASD could have been a
chance fnding. While this study was specifcally designed
to examine prenatal risk factors of autism and tested for a
wide range of potential confounders, the other one focused
on postnatal factors and hardly performed any adjustment
in the prenatal exposure analysis. Because of that, in our
opinion the results of the former study are more meaningful.
On the other hand, all of the case–control studies reported
no association between prenatal antibiotic exposure and
ASD, except for one that reported higher risk of autism in
exposed patients (Mrozek-Budzyn et al. 2013). However,

this study was performed in a relatively small group of children, and strangely, its fnding concerning antibiotic exposure was not explored in a multivariate analysis. Moreover,

compared to the literature an unexpectedly low percentage of women in

the control group (2.1%) was reported to have used antibiot-
ics during pregnancy, which may suggest a bias within the

exposure data.
Results of studies on postnatal antibiotic exposure are
conficting. One cohort study reported a reduced risk of
ASD in children after antibiotic use .
However, since the main model was based only on data from

administrative databases, the authors performed secondary analyses based on a sibling-controlled design. In those

analyses, antibiotic use was not associated with the risk of

developing ASD, hence, the authors concluded that the marginal association observed in the main model was unlikely

to be meaningful. In another cohort study , the between-within sibling design analysis did not
confrm the fndings from the standard design analysis of
higher ASD risk after use of certain types of antibiotics. We
used data from these two studies to perform a meta-analysis,
and its results revealed no signifcant association. The fnal
included cohort study (Wimberley et al. 2018) reported a
positive association between postnatal antibiotic exposure

and autism risk. However, since its population largely overlapped with that of the previous cohort, the two cannot be

treated as independent studies for the purpose of this systematic review. Besides the lack of a sibling analysis in the

latter cohort, the diference in results might have originated
from the diferences in the exposure assessment. The authors
of the latter study defned ‘antibiotic use preceding the diagnosis of autism’ as the antibiotic received before the frst

diagnosis of autism registered in the national healthcare
databases. Median age for the frst autism diagnosis in this
study was 7.1 years, which is much later than both median
age of ASD diagnosis reported in the literature and median
age of frst developmental concerns in ASD .Therefore, even for the subgroup of children
exposed to antibiotics before ffth birthday it is unclear, if the
symptoms of autism were absent before the frst antibiotic
administration. In our opinion, this might have introduced
considerable bias.

All of the remaining case–control studies reported a positive association between postnatal antibiotic exposure and

ASD. All of these studies were characterized by considerable potential sources of bias, including small sample sizes

, self-selection

bias  refecting diferences between those who choose to participate in

a study and those who do not, potentially biased control
group selection ,
and/or lack of verifcation if the ASD diagnosis in the case
group was made by a professional.
Also, in all of these studies, the exposure data were based
on parental reports, so a risk of recall bias ,
especially over-reporting the exposure in ASD groups and
under-reporting in control groups, cannot be ruled out.
Data on specifc antibiotic types and risk of ASD are also
inconsistent. In one study, an increased risk of ASD was

reported after prenatal exposure to sulfonamides, penicillins and macrolides, but not cephalosporins . This is consistent with the evidence that macrolides
induce distinctive changes in the microbiome composition of
children . On the other hand, expected
microbiota alterations after the use of cephalosporins should
be at least as strong as those after use of penicillins, due to
cephalosporins’ broader spectrum  Accordingly, another study reported a stronger association between ASD and both pre- and postnatal exposure

to broad spectrum antibiotics  compared to moderate-spectrum antibiotics . However, no signifcant asso-
ciations were found between autism risk and exposure to

narrow-spectrum antibiotics, including macrolides. In two
other cohort studies, no signifcant associations between
ASD and individual types of antibiotics were described
. Individual anti-
biotic types were analyzed and reported diferently in each

of the studies included in our systematic review; therefore,

a meta-analysis was not possible. According to the available evidence, some patterns of microbiota composition in

individuals with ASD have been identifed, mostly regarding
the abundance of diferent Clostridia and Bacteroidetes species and an altered Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio . Such changes may be induced both by macrolides
and broad-spectrum antibiotics. On
the other hand, microbiota alterations in diferent individuals
might not follow a specifc pattern even after use of the same
antibiotic. Apart from the disturbance

of the microbiome-gut-brain axis, to our knowledge no well documented alternative explanations for the antibiotic-ASD

association have been proposed.
A question concerning all of the included studies is the
difculty in diferentiating whether the observed efects
were due to the antibiotics themselves or were due to the
antibiotics acting as a proxy or mediator of an underlying
infection. Only two of the included studies controlled for
infections occurring during the same period as antibiotic
exposure . Noneof the included studies investigated diferences in risk of

autism resulting from specifc indications for antibiotic ther-
apy. Three included studies reported a higher risk of autism
after maternal respiratory infections (Atladottir et al. 2012;
George et al. 2014), fever episodes and infuenza (Atladottir
et al. 2012), or “infections” in general (Guisso et al. 2018);
two studies found signifcant positive associations between
early childhood otitis media episodes and autism  Such associations
of prenatal and early-life infections with autism have been
documented before ,
and they may also be supported by underlying biological
mechanisms
All of the included studies in which the assessment of
exposure was based on parental reports collected after diagnosis of ASD have the possibility of recall bias. Knowledge

of a variety of potential exposures that are considered as
risk factors for ASD is common among parents of children
with ASD thus, they may tend to analyze the previous medical history of their children more and
report medication use more often than parents of the control
children. This is a similar efect to the one observed after
past claims of the supposed vaccination-autism association
 This may suggest a greater reliability
of antibiotic exposure data collected prospectively or derived
from medical records.
Yet another problem in the interpretation of possible
antibiotic-ASD associations is the fact that, despite stable
antibiotic use in Europe and USA in recent years , the prevalence of ASD is actually rising in these
regions . Nevertheless, given the heterogeneous etiology of autism, it is difcult to exclude the possibility that reduced antibiotic use is outweighed by other
environmental factors contributing to ASD risk.
Conclusions
Currently available data from observational studies do not conclusively support the hypothesis that prenatal or postnatal exposure to antibiotics as a group is a risk factor for ASD. However, a portion of the results from large cohort studies may suggest a possible trend towards higher
risk of ASD after use of certain types of antibiotics. More studies, most preferably of a prospective cohort design,
controlling adequately for potential confounding factors The Netherlands, Arnoud Verhoef: Sarphati Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Author Contributions HS conceptualized the study and participated in
its design and interpretation of the data; JŁ conceptualized the study, participated in its design,coordination, data collection and interpretation, and drafted the manuscript; BPG participated in the design and
coordination of the study, as well as data collection and interpretation; AH participated in the design of the study and data collection; RB participated in design of the study. All authors read and approved the fnal manuscript.
Compliance with Ethical Standards Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no confict of interest. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License  which permits unrestricted use, distribu tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.