Air pollution is a major public health and economic issue. associated with increased risk of mortality and morbidity in multiple diseases, such as cancer , inflammatory , neurological  and respiratory and cardiometabolic diseases . Despite the considerable number of studies demonstrating the adverse health effects of air

pollution, exposure to ambient air pollution surrounding pregnancy and the risk for Autism Spectrum disorder in newborns remains controversial. Genetic and environmental

factors specifically during perinatal periods have been found to increase risk of pathology and malformation in children . Air pollution is composed of a wide range of pollutants
such as particulate matter , nitrogen oxide , volatile
organic compounds, pesticides, ozone  and metals. Though few studies have focused
on pregnancy and risk of ASD, air pollutants such as PM , appear to have the
highest levels of toxicity . Among PM10, PM2.5 which have
an even smaller aerodynamic diameter 2.5 mm are particularly harmful, penetrating more rapidly, easily and deeply into the organism . 

Despite a recent article , no metaanalysis to date has
provided an overview or comparison of the effects of classes of air
pollutants , or the effects of sociodemographic risk factors such as parental ages, gender of newborns, or smoking.
In addition, there are no published guidelines as yet on how to
manage different data relating to a same risk within an included
article and no meta-analysis presented both risks quantified either as continuous or
as categorical variables.
We hypothesized that there was an increased risk of developing

ASD associated with air pollution during pregnancy. This metaanalysis focused on the association between children with ASD

and exposure to air pollutants during the perinatal period and involved three models
for each meta-analysis by air pollutant; a global model using all
risks listed in included articles, a pessimistic model using less
favorable data only, and an optimistic model using the most
favorable data only. We also investigated related sociodemographic
influences.

We reviewed all studies reporting an association between air
pollutants and ASD. The PubMed, Cochrane Library, ScienceDirect

and Embase databases were searched for all original articles published up to July 2020, using the keywords “air pollution” and “autism” or synonyms. Inclusion criteria included articles written in English or French, and that described our primary outcome variable i.e. the
association between perinatal exposure to ambient air pollution
and risk of ASD. The perinatal period included the preconception
period to the second year of life. Studies were required to report
risk estimates in the form of odds ratios  with 95% confidence
interval or to provide data that allowed OR calculation. In
order to identify studies not found through our database search
strategy, a manually search of new articles was carried out using
reference lists from all publications meeting inclusion criteria and
systematic reviews. Our search strategy is presented in and Two authors separately conducted all
literature searches, collated and, reviewed the abstracts based on
selection criteria and decided on the suitability of articles for inclusion. When questions arose over article suitability, a third author
reviewed the articles. Having reached a consensus, all
included articles were reviewed by the three authors.
The methodological quality of the studies was further evaluated
using the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network model
for case control and cohort studies.
The following 15 items were assessed: appropriate and clearly
focused question, selection bias , performance bias , attrition bias , detection bias , confusion
bias , presence of confidence intervals, and general level of
evidence . Similar items were used to evaluate case control
studies . We also used the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality
Assessment Scale model with the following 9
items: selection bias, comparability bias and
outcome bias . Each item was assigned a judgment of , or with the exception of item 2.1 and the final item concerning evidence level
of the SIGN checklist, which was assigned . Any
disagreements over suitability were discussed with a third author and a consensus reached. Assessment of article quality was
carried out for the two checklists by two authors .

The following data from articles were recorded: title, name of
first author, journal and year of publication, main objective, time of

exposure to air pollution , type and concentration of pollutants, crude and/or
adjusted OR and lower and upper limits, and population characteristics 
 Characteristics of pollutant exposure, of individuals or other variables were reported
for each study as mean ± standard-deviation (SD) and number (%)
for continuous and categorical variables respectively.
When data could be pooled, we conducted random effects meta-
analyses on the risk of ASD in newborns following air
pollutants exposure, centered at one. Particular attention was paid
to the type of statistics retrieved from the included articles . Air pollutants exposure were quantified

either as a continuous  or as categorical variables . For the highest level

of proof, we first normalized all OR for a standardized increment in
pollutant concentration . We took into account the original increment of the
pollutant and we assumed a linear exposure outcome relationship
(Shah et al., 2013b) using the following equation. When air pollutant levels were expressed in
parts per billion (ppb), we transformed those levels in mg/m3The effects expressed as interquartile (or quintile, or

percentile differences) were converted into effects per concentra-
tion unit increase with the previous equation  Meta-analyses were computed by type of air pollutants
periconceptional periods, and pregnancy trimester where sufficient data were available. For
each meta-analysis, three models were used Finally, we computed the aforementioned
meta-analyses categorical using OR based on categorical exposure
 For air pollutants that were the most reported, we also computed sensitivity analyses depending on the
methods to measure air pollutants. Heterogeneity between studies
was evaluated through forest plots, and their confidence intervals
(CI), and I-squared For example, a significant heterogeneity may be due to the
variability between the characteristics of the studies, such as the
exposure to air pollutants (type of air pollutants), periconceptional
periods (preconception, pregnancy, postnatal), pregnancy
trimester (first, second, third), characteristics of individuals (age of
mothers and fathers, smoking, gender of newborns, etc). To ensure
the robustness of our results, we conducted sensitivity analysis by
searching for potential publication bias through funnel plots

 of aforementioned meta-analyses. Then, we reper-
formed meta-analyses without the studies that were not evenly

distributed around the funnel base . When sample
size allowed, meta-regressions were performed to investigate the
relationship between risk of ASD in newborns following air
pollutant exposure and putative variables such as type of air

pollutant, periconceptional period, pregnancy trimester and population characteristics. Results were expressed as regression coefficients and 95% CI.

Use of the SIGN model, notably revealed selection and attrition
bias in included studies. Most studies had a high level of evidence.
Detailed characteristics of methodological quality assessment for
each included study are provided in Fig. 2. Overall, for the SIGN
model, most studies were shown to have a high level of evidence
but performed, with lowest performance found response rate. The
NOS model was also used to analyse the quality of included articles
Aims of included studies, study designs, and settings
All studies shared a similar objective i.e. the association of
exposure to air pollution  during the perinatal period and the development of
ASD.  the optimistic model only, an increased risk during pregnancy with
both the global and optimistic models, and an increased risk
regardless of the model used during the postnatal period.
The main findings revealed that air pollution particularly that of
PM2.5 during the periconception period was associated with an
increased risk of ASD in newborns, in all models used. The level of

evidence is poor for other air pollutants. Exposure during preg-
nancy  and postnatal periods may be the

most at-risk periods. The increased risk of ASD following exposure

to air pollutants surrounding pregnancy was not linked with soci-
odemographic factors.
We demonstrated that global air pollution exposure in the
perinatal period is a risk factor for ASD in newborns
perinatal period is a risk factor for ASD in newborns . Despite a previous meta-analysis , there

is the first to report a risk based on consideration of all air pollutants. As, exposures are in general multiple when quantifying risk, it

is likely that overall risk is of most interest as reported by other
authors
allowed analysis of several included studies presenting different
data for the same risk. There are presently no guidelines on how to manage
this issue. To avoid potential limitations, we
created three models for each meta-analysis; a global model based
on all risks reported in included articles, a pessimistic model using
less favorable risks only , and an optimistic
model using the most favorable risks only. Unsurprisingly, use of
optimistic models led to stronger results, but notably, we were
unable to demonstrate an increased risk using the pessimistic
model based on all air pollutants.
Risk of developing ASD in newborns increased using the global
and optimistic models only for all air pollutants, with a strong high
risk following exposure to PM2.5 whatever the model. Even use of
the pessimistic model based on the least favorable data (those with
the least increased risk) revealed a minimum increased risk of 6%
(up to 15% using the optimistic model). Nearly all individual studies
showed that maternal exposure to PM2.5 was associated with
increased risk of newborns with ASD
Thus indicating the
high level of evidence concerning the deleterious effects of PM2.5
and related risk of ASD. PM2.5 particles appear to be the most
dangerous pollutant due to their small size, and high volatility
able to be transported over longer distances . They also have a lower sedimentation velocity than other
larger particles such as PM10 69. PM are primarily composed of
toxic particles such as PAHs, inorganic particles, or organic carbon metals
Late pregnancy and early postnatal periods were found to be the
most at-risk periods for developing ASD following air pollution

exposure. These periods are crucial in the development of the infant , and can influence long-term health

outcomes. Late pregnancy is important for placental function, fetal growth and brain developments

and is also the period when maternal and fetal complications can
occur, such as gestational diabetes, pre-eclampsia, hypoxia or brain
injury (Dugan and Ma-Crawford, 2019; Ellery et al., 2018;
Schumacher et al., 2020; Ridder et al., 2019). Our result showing
increased risk of ASD during late pregnancy is in accordance with
previous meta-analyses . Similarly, the early
postnatal period can also impact health outcomes as has been

shown with breastfeeding which may impact a wide range of parameters such as cognition, brain structure, structural development

of the heart and lungs, bone health, or atopy . In comparison with the meta-analysis of Chun
et al., we highlighted the detrimental effects of air pollution leading

to increased risk of ASD during the postnatal period, being previously analyzed in relation to the prenatal period. Our results show

that the most at-risk periods for ASD were early and late pregnancy
and the early postnatal period. These results are in accordance with
other studies on air pollution that have showed these periods to

also be the most at-risk for other birth outcomes such as hyper-
tension, preeclampsia, pre-term birth, or low birthweight . Both late pregnancy
neurodevelopmental outcomes such as ASD. In our meta-analysis,
neither parental age or newborn genders were found to influence

risk following exposure to air pollutants. However, our meta-
regressions analyzed whether air pollution modifies this risk

depending on parental age or newborn genders. Other investigated
putative risk factors for ASD include maternal food intake , low birthweight or preterm birth. As these factors were not assessed in
the articles included in our meta-analysis, further analyses were
precluded.

Our study has some limitations. Despite the large number of
studies, some air pollutants were only included in a few studies.

Common air pollutants such as PM2.5, PM10, or NOx, were however commonly assessed and as we included a large sample of 395

615 newborns, this allowed the greater generalizability of our results. Our meta-analysis inherited the limitations of the 28 included

studies and was therefore subject to individual bias such as bias of
measures of exposure to air pollutants and bias of reporting of ASD.
Despite the quality of research reflected in the studies included in
our meta-analyses, ASD covers a wide range of severity that was not
reported within included articles. Diagnostic method for ASD also
differed, limiting quality of data and precluding further analyses,

although, most articles used National ASD databases thus guaranteeing data accuracy. A further limitation concerns a possible underestimation of our results. Diagnostic evidence of ASD can be

underestimated but is unlikely to be overestimated. Similarly,
methods for detection or measurement of air pollutant exposure
differed between studies, thus precluding assessment of dose

response effects. In addition despite similarities, population characteristics between studies were not identical. Data were collected

in various countries, but excluded developing countries. The majority of studies were conducted in the USA

from Africa, Asia, and Oceania reduces potential generalizability of
our results, though. All ethnicities were included. Generalizability
of our results may also be lessened due to analysis of single-site
studies, even if the majority of included studies were multi-site.
As studies differed in their study design, we performed sensitivity
analyses allowing demonstration of similar results whatever the
design. In our meta-analysis global model, some included studies
appeared several times, with different data for the same outcome
depending on adjustment models. In the absence of clear

consensus and despite having more effect sizes within each meta analyses when compared with studies included in several highlyregarded published articles published

articles published, the weight of studies may have required

ponderation  This is one of the reasons for use of optimistic and pessimistic models when only one

data is available for each included article. A further limitation of our
meta-analysis concerns included studies using OR adjusted on
different factors between studies, even if adjusted OR may limit

confusion bias. Finally, causality may also be a limitation in retro-
spective or case-control studies.

Exposure to air pollution, notably PM2.5 during pregnancy was
associated with an increased risk of ASD in newborns regardless of

the model used. The level of evidence concerning other air pol-
lutants is however poor. Exposure during pregnancy and the

postnatal period appear to be the most at-risk periods.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
