The dreams of many infertile couples to have offspring(s) have been made possible by assisted reproductive technology . Through its constant development, morbidity
due to infertility has been massively decreased . Every technique, such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection  and frozen embryo transfer, is designed as solutions for specific problems. For example, in cases where two previous conventional in vitro fertilization  failed, or if the

majority of sperms are immotile, ICSI is the technique
that offers the highest possibility to acquire pregnancy  Meanwhile, when couples preferred to obtain
pregnancy, cryopreservation enables
them to freeze embryos for implantation at later times .
Studies on prenatal and postnatal outcomes in ART,
such as the risks of multiple pregnancies and congenital
malformations, have already been comprehensively
reviewed and meta-analyzed on previous publications

[4–10]. Conversely, lesser number of studies have fo-
cused on the neurodevelopmental aspects of children

from ART. The nature of certain neurodevelopmental
disorders that might not be visible until later stage in
children’s lives, difficulties in obtaining long-term
follow-up, and the fact that many disorders can only be
diagnosed and treated in a multidisciplinary fashion
might be some of the reasons that caused limitation in
the number of studies on neurodevelopmental outcomes
in these children. Nonetheless, several studies have been
published to date, and it is important to gain consensual
conclusions on the actual risks of neurodevelopmental
disorders among these children.

This study aims to assess the risks of neurodevelopmental abnormalities in children from ART treatments,

in comparison to naturally conceived children through

meta-analysis. As different ART treatments may translate into different pathophysiology, the neurodevelop-
mental outcomes in children from different ART

techniques are also compared.
Methods
Literature search and identification
This systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted
according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses 
reporting guidelines. PubMed, Scopus, and Google
scholars’ databases were used to collect publications up
to January 16, 2020. The following search terms were
applied: reproductive techniques, assisted OR assisted
reproductive OR in vitro fertilization OR in vitro

fertilization AND Child development OR adolescent de-
velopment OR long term follow-up OR Developmental

disabilities OR Developmental disability OR Language
disorders OR Language disorder OR Neurodevelopment

OR mental disorder OR mental disorders OR neuro-
psychiatry. Additional studies were identified through

screening of the reference lists.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Studies were included if they ) compared any neurode-
velopment aspects in ART children to children from

natural conceptions, and  described the neurodeve-
lopment in children from common ART techniques, in-
cluding conventional IVF, ICSI, cryopreserved, and fresh

embryo transfers, then compared them to either children
in general population or children conceived by different

treatment modalities. Studies were excluded if  infor-
mation were insufficient, particularly related to the sub-
jects and parameters in the study, not including

original data, such as reviews, systematic reviews, com-
ments, or editorial letters, not including control

group, or could not ascertain the used
fertility treatment, and not written in English.
Data collection and analysis
The title and abstract of every article were independently
reviewed by 3 authors . If the abstract

met the inclusion criteria, the full-text article was thoroughly reviewed. Reference lists on the identified publications were screened for previously unidentified but

relevant studies. The following information were re-
trieved: author, country, publication year, number of pa-
tients, criteria of neurodevelopmental disorders, and the

patients’ neurodevelopmental outcomes. The quality of
methodology was assessed using the risk of bias criteria
that were specified in Newcastle-Ottawa Scale 
Based on the final ratings, high-quality studies
 were included in the meta-analyses.
Statistical analysis
Meta-analysis was performed using Mantel-Haenszel

risk ratio  with 95% confidence interval for dichot-
omous data. Meta-analysis was performed on subgroup

analysis based on the types of the acquired neurodevelopmental disorders, including cerebral palsy, intellectual

disability, autism spectrum disorder, and behavioral

problems. To describe the overall risk of neurodevelopmental disorders, a meta-analysis of the overall data was

also conducted. The RevMan version 5.3 software
 was used for these purposes
Inconsistency index  test, which ranges from 0 to
100%, was calculated to evaluate heterogeneity across
studies. Values above 50% or p value < 0.10 indicate a
significant heterogeneity. Regression-based Egger’s test
was used to evaluate small study effect and the risk of
publication bias. p values less than 0.05 were considered
as significant bias. Cochrane Risk of Bias Assessment
tool  was used to assess the

risk of bias. Certainty of the evidence quality was evaluated by using the Guideline Development Tool by GRADEpro.


The literature searches identified 1511 studies. Addition-
ally, 32 studies were identified through reference screen-
ing . In total, 181 full-text articles were reviewed,

and only 17 articles fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Based
on the Newcastle-Ottawa scale ratings, 7 studies 
were excluded. Thus, 10 studies  were included

in the meta-analyses, including 8 cohorts and 2 case-
control studies. Newcastle-Ottawa Scale results for the

cohort studies are described on Supplemental Table 1,
while descriptions of the case-control studies are
reviewed . Characteristics of
the included studies are presented 
ART vs natural conception
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy was reported in 5 studies
 with an absolute
risk of 7 per 1000 births at ART group and 4 per 1000
births at baseline population. No risk of publication bias  and no small study bias
Risk of intellectual disability was reported in 5 studies  Risk of intellectual dis-
ability in children born after ART treatments was not
different from the risk in children from natural conceptions, with the same absolute risk of 3 per
1000 births . Risk of publication
bias  and small-study bias  were undetected

Risk of autism spectrum disorder
Six studies reported the risk of ASD

One study  was excluded as it did not include children from natural conceptions as control. The risk of acquiring ASD in ART children is insignificantly different

with its risk in naturally conceived children

with identical absolute risk at 6 per 1000 births Risk of publication bias and small-study biaswere unidentified 
Behavioral problems
Risk of behavioral problems was reported in 2 studies
 and the results showed no differences in this
risk between ART and naturally conceived group 
. The absolute risk is 19 children per 1000 births at ART group and 18 per 1000 births at naturally conceived group . Risk of bias and
small-study effects could not be estimated due to limited
studies 
Meta-analysis on the overall data showed that ART
children have a higher overall risk of neurodevelopmental disorders. Heterogeneity was identified for the

overall studies, and this might be due to cofounder effects. The overall studies showed no risk of publication
biasand no small-study bias
 The absolute risk effect showed no increase in number of children born with neurodevelopmental disorders with a baseline population risk of 3 per 1000

births (Supplemental Table 5).
ICSI vs conventional IVF 
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy in children from ICSI and
conventional IVF was reported in 2 studies. ICSI

procedure causes no increase in the prevalence of cere-
bral palsy compared to conventional Risk of intellectual disability

Risk of intellectual disability   was reported

in 5 studies Risk of intellectual disability in children born after ART treatments was not

different from the risk in children from natural concep-
tions, with the same absolute risk of 3 per
1000 births . Risk of publication
bias (and small-study bias were undetected 

Risk of autism spectrum disorder
Six studies reported the risk of ASD

One study [24] was excluded as it did not include children from natural conceptions as control. The risk of acquiring ASD in ART children is insignificantly different

with its risk in naturally conceived children

with identical absolute risk at 6 per 1000 births Risk of publication bias  and small-study bias were unidentified (Supplemental Table 4).
Behavioral problems
Risk of behavioral problems was reported in 2 studies
[20, 29], and the results showed no differences in this
risk between ART and naturally conceived group
The absolute risk is 19 children per 1000 births

at ART group and 18 per 1000 births at naturally conceived group  Risk of bias and

small-study effects could not be estimated due to limited
studies .
Meta-analysis on the overall data showed that ART

children have a higher overall risk of neurodevelopmen-
tal disorders Heterogeneity was identified for the

overall studies, and this might be due to cofounder effects. The overall studies showed no risk of publication

bias and no small-study bias . The absolute risk effect showed no increase in

number of children born with neurodevelopmental disorders with a baseline population risk of 3 per 1000 births 
ICSI vs conventional IVF
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy in children from ICSI and
conventional IVF was reported in 2 studies [22, 26]. ICSI

procedure causes no increase in the prevalence of cerebral palsy compared to conventional Risk of intellectual disability

Risk of intellectual disability  was reported

in 5 studies Risk of intellectual disability in children born after ART treatments was not

different from the risk in children from natural conceptions  , with the same absolute risk of 3 per
1000 births. Risk of publication
bias and small-study bias were undetected 

Risk of autism spectrum disorder
Six studies reported the risk of ASD.

One study [24] was excluded as it did not include children from natural conceptions as control. The risk of acquiring ASD in ART children is insignificantly different
with its risk in naturally conceived children

with identical absolute risk at 6 per 1000 births Risk of publication bias and small-study bias  were unidentified 
Behavioral problems
Risk of behavioral problems was reported in 2 studies
 and the results showed no differences in this
risk between ART and naturally conceived group 
 The absolute risk is 19 children per 1000 births

at ART group and 18 per 1000 births at naturally conceived group. Risk of bias and

small-study effects could not be estimated due to limited
studies 
Meta-analysis on the overall data showed that ART

children have a higher overall risk of neurodevelopmental disorders. Heterogeneity was identified for the
overall studies, and this might be due to cofounder ef-
fects. The overall studies showed no risk of publication

bias  and no small-study bias
 The absolute risk effect showed no increase in

number of children born with neurodevelopmental dis-
orders with a baseline population risk of 3 per 1000

births .
ICSI vs conventional 
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy in children from ICSI and
conventional IVF was reported in 2 studies 

procedure causes no increase in the prevalence of cere-
bral palsy compared to conventional 
ICSI
group, while IVF population risk is 4 per 1000 births
. The risk of bias statistic and

small-study effects could not be estimated
Risk of intellectual disability
Prevalence of intellectual disability was reported in 3 studies An increased risk of intellectual disability was identified in the ICSI group compared to

conventional IVF , with absolute risk at
ICSI group is 5 per 1000 births, while in IVF group is 3 per 1000 births . No risk of publication bias  and small study bias
Risk of autism spectrum disorder
The number of children diagnosed with ASD was reported in 2 studies . There is an increased risk of

ASD in children born after ICSI procedure compared to
conventional IVF , with an absolute risk effect of 1 more children per 1000 births compared to IVF

population risk of 2 per 1000 births). The risk of bias statistic and small-study effects could
not be calculated
The overall evaluation showed higher prevalence of
neurodevelopmental disorders in children from ICSI
compared to children from conventional IVF
Frozen vs fresh embryo transfer (6 studies)
Risk of cerebral palsy
Prevalence of cerebral palsy was reported in 3 studies

. Risk of cerebral palsy in children from fro-
zen embryo transfer was similar to fresh embryo transfer
, with an absolute risk of 64 children in fro-
zen group and 66 children in fresh group per 1000 births

or 2 less children at risk compared to fresh group . The high number of children at risk
Overall analysis showed that the children from frozen

embryo transfer do not develop higher risk of neurodevelopmental disorders compared to children from fresh

embryo transfer . The risk of neurodevelopmental disorder in children from frozen embryos is at 14 per 1000

births while in fresh embryos was 16 per 1000 births

Additionally, potential cofounders to the results were also
evaluated. Two cofounders’ effects were confirmed by
meta-analysis, including preterm birth and low birth body

weight. The results showed that the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders is higher in children with history of preterm birth  with the absolute risk is 6

more children born with neurodevelopmental disorders in every 1000 births 
Meanwhile, the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders in children with history of low birth body weight
 is also higher compared to
children without any history of low birth body weight
, with the absolute risk is 6

more children born with neurodevelopmental disor-
ders in every 1000 births .

ART procedures have the potentials to cause higher
rates of multiple birth

To our knowledge, a meta-analysis on the neurodevelopmental outcomes in children from ART has never been

performed. This study aimed to make consensual conclusions from all studies that investigated the neurodevelopmental outcomes in children from ART, including

ICSI, conventional IVF, frozen embryo transfer, and

fresh embryo transfer. The results of this study are expected to provide the reliable information for the patients and healthcare workers to consider before starting

As seen in Fig. 2, without taking specific details of the
ART treatments into account, the results show that ART
children develop an increased risk of cerebral palsy, but
not intellectual disability, ASD, or behavioral problems.
Cerebral palsy is a permanent neurological disorder
characterized with disability to coordinate muscle tones
and movements. This condition is caused by the damage

or dysgenesis of brain part(s) that are involved in the coordination and movements of the body. It has been consensually accepted that the common risk factors for

cerebral palsy are preterm birth and low birth body
weight [31, 32]. In our study, we could confirm that
these are the most likely risk factors that were presented
among children from ART with cerebral palsy  The ART procedures are associated with higher preterm birth and low birth body
weight, as they are also related to higher rates of

multiple birth. ART procedures could cause monozygotic twinning related to zona pellucida manipulation

and extended in vitro culture. Moreover, double embryo transfers during IVF procedures resulted in

higher chance of multiple pregnancy . Since the
pathogenesis of cerebral palsy could be initiated with

insults during gestation or after delivery, we could
not conclude if the pathogenesis of cerebral palsy
among ART children is due to the respiratory distress
that is caused by immature lungs, which eventually

lead to cerebral hypoxia after birth, or as a consequence of dysgenesis of part(s) of the brain that is re-
lated to movements and coordination. Nonetheless, these findings revealed the importance of optimum
prenatal and neonatal care for ART children.

Interestingly, when the neurodevelopmental out comes in children from ICSI were compared to the

outcomes in children from conventional IVF, increased risks of intellectual disability and ASD were

identified in the ICSI group. It is widely known that
in some cases, intellectual disability and cerebral palsy
are overlapping clinical conditions [34]. However, as
the differences in the prevalence of cerebral palsy in

children from ICSI and conventional IVF are statisti-
cally insignificant, we speculate that in these cases, in tellectual disability is more likely due to inert

factor(s), such as genetics. Furthermore, ASD has
been associated with numerous genetic disorders, and

has never been indicated as a result of neonatal in sults. Thus, we argue that the cause of higher risks of

intellectual disability and ASD in children from ICSI
is genetic related.
As we know, ICSI is intended to prevent fertilization

failure. One of the indications that becomes practi tioners’ common consideration when suggesting ICSI is

sperm immotility . Despite successes of achieving

pregnancies after ICSI using immotile or morphologic-
ally abnormal spermatozoa , reports have suggested that the rates of DNA fragmentation in immotile

spermatozoa are higher than in normal spermatozoa

[40]. Furthermore, poor-quality oocytes, advanced maternal age, and unexplained infertility have also been

used as indications to perform ICSI  Each of the
previously mentioned indication has also been associated
with higher rates of DNA fragmentation; hence, this
might be related to neurodevelopmental disorders. Study

by Porokhovnik et al. correlates infantile autism with elevated DNA damage degree [41]; thus, our findings

might be related to any of these factors.
As cryopreservation became more integrated to the

common ART practice nowadays, the comparison between children from frozen embryo transfer with children from fresh embryo transfer was also performed.

As previous reports have suggested, the risk of ac-
quiring DNA fragmentations during cryopreservation

and thawing processes might be associated with re-
duced numbers and proportion of trophectoderm cells , higher prevalence of neurodevelopmental disorders in children from frozen embryo transfer is expected. To our surprise, the meta-analysis results
showed that there are no significant differences between the risks of neurodevelopmental disorders in

children from frozen embryo transfer compared to the risk in children from fresh embryo transfer. Previous studies also reported that frozen embryo transfer

resulted in increased live birth rate and higher neo-
natal birth body weight . The improvement of

cryopreservation techniques, such as vitrification and
elective frozen embryo transfer, might result in better
pregnancy and neonatal outcome

The present study has several limitations. First, the num-
ber of studies that reported neurodevelopmental out-
comes from different ART procedures is limited. This
limitation correlates with the limited number of patients
and the possibilities that some of the findings might be
population specific. Secondly, singleton and multiple
births could not be differentiated in some studies. Previ-
ous studies suggested that multiple pregnancy carries
higher risks of prematurity and low birth body weight
, both could potentially contribute to the risks of
neurodevelopmental disorders  Third, the
matched case-control studies could introduce potential
conclusion bias on the absolute number of children at
risk in the normal population. To overcome all of these
limitations, future studies that involve larger populations
with sufficient background information are required.

In conclusion, children from ART have a higher risk of acquiring cerebral palsy than children from natural conceptions. This increased risk is possibly associated with
confounding factors, including preterm birth and low
body birth weight. Based on this finding, it is reasonable
to perform deliveries of children from ART at facilities
with available neonatal intensive care unit (NICU); thus,
treatment of potential cerebral insults after birth can be
optimized. Furthermore, children from ICSI carry higher
risks of intellectual disability and ASD than children

from conventional IVF. These findings suggest the importance of long-term follow-up and preimplantation
genetic screening, particularly in fertilizations by ICSI.
Lastly, cryopreservation and thawing of embryos did not seem to cause increases in any risks of neurodevelop-
mental disorders; therefore, freeze-all strategy seemed plausible.