Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by
communication and interaction difficulties as well as repeated and stereotyped behaviors and
interests . Approximately 66 million individuals worldwide have ASD, and it has been reported to
begin early in life .
Although the exact cause of ASD is unknown, genetic factors are key contributors. Further,
various environmental factors are involved and are considered an important aspect of the increased
prevalence of ASD . Rapid industrialization and the consequent environmental pollution have
also increased the risk of exposure to toxic substances via various pathways. Since ASD occurs early in
life, studies have reported that toxic exposure, such as mercury poisoning in the prenatal or childhood
period, could cause ASD  Therefore, infant mercury poisoning caused by seafood consumption
by the mother, pediatric vaccination, and prenatal use of antibiotics has been suggested to cause
ASD . Moreover, studies have reported that pre-  and postnatal exposure to antibiotics and
acetaminophen increases the ASD risk
Although antibiotics are essential for treating some diseases, antibiotic exposure has been
associated with various diseases. Antibiotic use can cause abnormal changes in the human microbiome.
Studies have suggested that when the altered microbiome is passed onto the fetus, it increases the risk
of colitis and ASD by impeding neurological development . Further, antibiotic exposure
has been reported to be weakly associated with the risk for ASD ; however, this association
cannot be clearly established given the difficulty of measuring fetal antibiotic exposure. Studies have
also reported that postnatal antibiotic exposure is associated with ASD; specifically, postnatal use of
acetaminophen and antibiotics, as well as ear infection, were reported to increase the risk for ASD .
This indicates that despite continued studies on the association between ASD and antibiotics,
a definitive conclusion is yet to be reached. Particularly, the lack of consensus on pre- and postnatal
antibiotic exposure has hindered efforts toward determining this relationship. Therefore, we aimed
to conduct two-side meta-analyses to clearly determine the relationship between ASD and antibiotic
use as well as present foundational data for preventive and management strategies for lowering the
ASD risk.
Search Strategy and Selection Criteria
This meta-analysis was performed in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines and was
approved by the institutional review board of Gachon University .
We searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library databases for all relevant
studies written in English and published before February 2019. The search terms used were  andFor meta-analysis, we included studies that reported the association between ASD and
pre- or postnatal antibiotic exposure in childhood and excluded studies that did not report the
antibiotic exposure level as well as the ASD and control group. We included observational studies,
including case-control, cross-sectional, and cohort studies and excluded commentary, editorial, and
review articles.
All authors independently screened and selected relevant data, and any disagreements were
resolved by discussion. We extracted relevant data, including first author, publication year, study
design, country, sample size, age of participants, and related outcomes. Moreover, to assess the
association between ASD and pre- or postnatal antibiotic exposure in childhood, we extracted all
measurement data including prevalence data of patients with ASD and controls group as well as the
number and amount of pre- and postnatal antibiotic exposure. The risk estimates of ASD in antibiotic
exposure and the standardized mean difference  of antibiotic exposure in ASD were analyzed
via meta-analysis using the Comprehensive Meta-Analysis software version 3 . We assessed the heterogeneity using the Q statistic and I
model was applied in all analyses to address heterogeneity. Subgroup analyses were performed
based on group differences in prenatal and postnatal exposure. Publication bias was assessed using
funnel plots and Egger’s intercept. indicated a significant difference. Furthermore, for
quality assessment, we used the Newcastle Ottawa Scale to assess the methodological quality
of the nine included studies . The NOS is a representative tool developed for meta-analysis
of non-randomized comparative studies, including case-control, cross-sectional, and cohort studies.
It comprises an adjustment item with the selection of study groups, comparability of the groups, and
determination of either the exposure or outcome of interest to evaluate the quality of articles included
in the meta-analyses.
We initially identified 1877 studies , and after the elimination of duplicates using the
Endnote reference database, 1459 studies remained. We excluded 1348 articles based on the titles and
60 articles based on the abstract, and thus were left with 51 articles that were eligible for full-text
screening. After close review, 42 publications were excluded because of lack of usable data and failure
to meet the inclusion criteria. Finally, a total of nine articles were identified and included in the
meta-analysis. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the nine selected studies, which were published
between 2007 and 2019.  All studies were performed in the USA, Denmark, Italy, Lebanon, Canada, and Sweden. The age of the subjects
ranged from birth to 18 years. The outcomes of the nine studies were only described as related content
regarding ASD and antibiotic usage.
We initially identified 1877 studies , and after the elimination of duplicates using the
Endnote reference database, 1459 studies remained. We excluded 1348 articles based on the titles and
60 articles based on the abstract, and thus were left with 51 articles that were eligible for full-text
screening. After close review, 42 publications were excluded because of lack of usable data and failure
to meet the inclusion criteria. Finally, a total of nine articles were identified and included in the
meta-analysis. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the nine selected studies, which were published
between 2007 and 2019. The outcomes of the nine studies were only described as related content
regarding ASD and antibiotic usage. In addition, the quality scores ranged from 5 to 8.
Meta-Analysis Result Relating the ASD Risk in Antibiotic Exposure
To investigate the association between ASD and antibiotic exposure, the ASD risk was analyzed
based on the antibiotic exposure and control group. As shown in Figure 2A, meta-analysis results
indicated that early antibiotic exposure, including pre- and postnatal, significantly increased the
ASD risk in children ) with moderate heterogeneity

, the results of subgroup analyses showed that prenatal antibiotic
exposure significantly increased the ASD risk with
moderate heterogeneity Furthermore, as shown in Figure 2C, postnatal antibiotic
exposure significantly increased the ASD risk in children. Moderate heterogeneity was identified across all studies; therefore,
a random-effects model was performed. The funnel plots and Egger’s test  showed significant
results in seven of the included studies; however, in subgroup analyses, the results of the Egger’ tests
 were not significant, indicating no publication bias.
Meta-Analysis Results Related to Antibiotic Exposure in ASD
To assess the association between ASD and antibiotic exposure in children, we analyzed differences
in antibiotic exposure between the ASD and control groups. Meta-analysis results showed significantly
increased early antibiotic exposure, including pre- and postnatal, in children with ASD. Further, there was obvious heterogeneity in the included
studies therefore, we applied a random-effects model to the analysis. The funnel plots and
Egger’s test did not give significant results (p = 0.67), indicating no publication bias. In the subgroup
analyses, prenatal antibiotic exposure was significantly increased in children with ASD  with moderate heterogeneity . However, as shown
in Figure 3C, there was no significant difference in the postnatal antibiotic exposure between children
with ASD and controls. there was significant heterogeneity across all studies; therefore, a random-effects model was
performed. Furthermore, the funnel plots and Egger’s test performed for all studies did not show
statistical significance , indicating no
publication bias.
This study analyzed the relationship between ASD and early antibiotic use in children using
two-sided meta-analyses. Specifically, we analyzed the relationship between ASD and pre- and
postnatal antibiotic exposure in children using a systematic method. Our results indicated that pre and postnatal antibiotic use increased the ASD risk. This is consistent with previous reports that pre-
and postnatal antibiotic use causes ASD in children . In our study, both pre- and postnatal
antibiotic use increased the ASD risk ; however, only prenatal, but not postnatal, antibiotic
use was significantly elevated in children with ASD compared to controls . It is difficult
to compare or discuss the risk levels of prenatal and postnatal antibiotic use because studies on the
relationship between ASD risk and postnatal antibiotic use did not specify the prenatal antibiotic
exposure . Further, studies on the relationship between ASD onset and prenatal antibiotic use
did not specifically mention a follow-up on postnatal antibiotic exposure . However, the results
of our bidirectional meta-analysis suggest that prenatal antibiotic exposure is a more potent risk
factor for ASD. This is further indicated by a pre-birth cohort study that examined the association
between pre- and postnatal smoking exposure and atopic eczema, and reported that only prenatal
smoking exposure increased the risk of atopic eczema by 7.11 times compared to postnatal smoking
exposure . Moreover, ASD, which is an early complex neurodevelopmental disorder, is known
to develop before the age of three. In particular, the fetal period is a crucial period in brain
development and exposure to harmful environmental factors during this period can substantially
increase the risk of neurodevelopmental disorders . One study reported that prenatal opiate
exposure affected brain development  Therefore, prenatal antibiotic exposure is believed to be an
important risk factor for ASD onset . Indeed, early postnatal antibiotic exposure is known to
increase ASD risk. However, in our study, the reduced influence of postnatal antibiotic exposure on
increasing ASD risk could be attributed to the age range of our study population .
Further studies comparing pre- and postnatal antibiotic use with adjustment for various confounders
should be conducted to confirm our results.
Although we systematically analyzed the relationship between ASD and early antibiotic exposure,
this study has a few limitations. First, although we analyzed various data on antibiotic exposure,
including the number and amount of exposure as well as diverse antibiotic mechanisms, we could not
analyze according to antibiotic type due to insufficient data. Further, we did not consider the gestational
age in prenatal exposure and used a wide age range for postnatal exposure. Second, although we
used a random-effects model to address the high heterogeneity and indicated no publication bias,
except for the total results relating to ASD in early exposure, we had a limited sample size. Third,
postnatal antibiotic exposure remains controversial. Although the test results on publication bias
showed low statistical significance, they cannot be considered conclusive on their own given the small
sample size and their closeness to statistical significance. There has been ambiguity in distinguishing
different periods in previous studies on the effects of pre- and postnatal antibiotic use. Further, small
experimental and large investigative studies reported contradicting findings due to the difficulty of
adjusting for various confounders, which were described as limitations. Thus, there is a need for large
controlled experimental or cohort studies adjusting for potential confounders to clearly determine the
impact of postnatal antibiotic exposure on ASD.
Notwithstanding these limitations, this study remains significant since it used two-sided
meta-analyses to systematically analyze the relationship between ASD and early antibiotic exposure
and provides more evidence on the association between ASD risk and prenatal antibiotic exposure.
Subsequent studies should further analyze the association of pre- and postnatal antibiotic exposure
with ASD to contribute towards lowering the ASD risk and the prevention and management of ASD
in children.
